=== PAGE 1 ===
Electrical Submersible Pump (ESP)
COMPONENTS (EQUIPMENT
DESCRIPTION)
PTP- 6.1
Table of Contents
1

=== PAGE 2 ===
Page Number
1. Introduction 03
2. Centrifugal Pump 04
3. Rotary Gas Separator 07
4. Seal Section 08
5. Electrical Submersible Motor 10
6. Motor Controllers 11
7. Variable Speed Controllers 12
8. Downhole Pressure and Temperature Monitor 13
9. Transformer 13
10. Junction Box 13
11. Wellhead 13
12. Check Valve 14
13. Drain Valve 14
14. Backspin Relay 15
15. Centralizer 15
16. Cable 15
17. Cable Band 16
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Electrical Submersible Pump (ESP)
COMPONENTS (EQUIPMENT DESCRIPTION)                               
1. Introduction
The driving force, which displaces oil from a reservoir, comes from the natural energy
of the compressed fluids in the reservoir.  The energy that makes the well to flow
results from a reduction in pressure between the reservoir and the wellbottom.  If the
pressure reduction between the reservoir and the surface producing facilities is large
enough, the well will flow naturally to the surface using the natural energy supplied by
the reservoir.
When the natural energy associated with oil will not produce a pressure differential
between reservoir and wellbore sufficient to lift reservoir fluids to the surface and into
surface facilities, the reservoir energy must be supplemented by some form of artificial
lift.
The ESP is considered an effective and economical means of lifting large volumes of
fluids from great depths under a variety of well conditions.  The submersible pump
companies, along with the major oil companies, have gained considerable experience in
producing high viscosity fluids, gassy wells, high temperature wells, etc.  With the
improved technology, wells that were once considered non-feasible for submersible
pumps are now being pumped economically.
The pumping system is made up of several components.  These components are: three-
phase electric motor, seal section, rotary gas separator, multi-stage centrifugal pump,
electric  power cable, motor controller  and transformers.  Additional miscellaneous
components  will  normally  include  wellhead,  cable bands,  check and drain  valves.
Optional  equipment  may  include  a  downhole  pressure  and  temperature  sensor  to
monitor  wellbore  conditions.  The  ESP  is  suspended  from  discharge  tubing  and
submerged in well fluids.  A typical Electric Submersible Pump installation is shown in
figure 1
The picture shows a common type of installation and is more-or-less a standard one.  In
this type of installation, the unit is placed above the perforation zone.  The produced
fluid is forced to move upward from the perforations past the motor.  In doing so the
produced fluid, while flowing past the motor, absorbs the heat generated in the motor
and thereby cools it.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
                                  
Figure 1- a (Components)
4
TRANSFORMERS
MOTOR CONTROLLER
JUNCTION BOX
CASING
TUBING
CENTRIFUGAL PUMP
ROTARY GAS SEPARATOR
SEAL SECTION
ELECTRIC MOTORFLAT CABLECABLE BANDSCHECK VALVEDRAIN VALVETYPICAL INSTALLATION
COMPONANTS

=== PAGE 5 ===
5
OIL OUT THROUGH
TUBING
GAS OUT THROUGH
CASINGCABLE BAND

=== PAGE 6 ===
Figure 1-b (ESP Installation)
Figure 1-c ( Unit is placed below the perforation)
6
SHROUD

=== PAGE 7 ===
2. Centrifugal Pump
Submersible  pumps  are  mostly  multi-staged  centrifugal  pumps.   Each  stage  of  a
submersible pump consists of a rotating part called impeller and stationary part called
diffuser.  There  are  two  components  to  the  motion  imparted  to  the  liquid  by  the
impeller.  One motion is in a radial direction outward from the center of the impeller.
This motion is caused by centrifugal force.  The other motion moves in direction
tangential to the outside diameter of the impeller.  As a result of these two components
is the actual direction of flow.  The diffuser's function is to change the  velocity energy
into pressure energy.
There are two general types of design for submersible pumps. The smaller flow pumps
are mostly of radial flow design.  Figure 2-a shows such a stage configuration. In this
type the impeller discharges the fluid in mostly a radial direction.  As the pumps reach
design flows of approximately 300 M3/d in the 400 series pumps and 550  M3  /d in
the larger diameter pumps, the design changes to a mixed flow.  Figure 2-b shows this
configuration.  The impeller in this stage design imparts a direction to the fluid that
contains substantial axial direction as well as radial direction.
      
Figure 2-a Figure 2-b
7ELECTR ICA L SUBM ER SIBLE PU M P (ESP)
C ENTR IFU GAL PUM P STAG ES
R ADIA L FLO W M IXED FLO W

=== PAGE 8 ===
In many of the pump designs, the impeller is free to float axially on the shaft and the
individual impeller stage is absorbed on specially designed pads found on the diffuser.
A specially designed thrust bearing contained in the seal section carries only the thrust
of the pump shaft.  This configuration is called a floating stage design.  The benefit of
this design is that many stages can be stacked together  without having to fix the
impellers axially on the shaft with precise alignment.   As a result, pumps can be
manufactured having hundreds of individual stages.
As pump diameter increases beyond about 6 inches (1 50 mm), the impellers are locked
to the pump shaft in the axial direction and no thrust is absorbed by the impeller
rubbing on the diffuser.  As a result, the thrust bearing contained in the seal section
must carry the impeller thrust in addition to shaft thrust.  This configuration is referred
to as a fixed impeller  or compression pump design.  The  impellers  are of  a fully
enclosed curved vane design, whose maximum efficiency is a function of the impeller
design and type and whose operating efficiency is a function of the percent of design
capacity at which the pump is operated.  The mathematical relationship between head,
capacity, efficiency and brake horsepower is expressed as:
BHP = Q x H x Specific Gravity / Pump Efficiency
Q = Volume 
H = Head
 The  diameter  and  configuration  of  the pump  impeller  determines  the  amount  of
acceleration energy that is transmitted to the fluid.  The pump size will be determined
by the well casing size. The internal diameter of the impeller is dependent on the
outside diameter of the shaft, which must be strong enough to transmit power to all
stages of the pump.  Submersible centrifugal pumps are manufactured for various sizes
of well casings.
Stages are designed to have a downward thrust force on the impeller through the
operating  range.   This  force  would  vary  from  low  at  maximum  operating  with
increasing force toward minimum operating.  It is designed in this manner so as to
provide stable hydraulic operation.  Therefore, the pump should be operated within the
stages recommended operating range to provide optimum life.  Pumps operated outside
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
this range will have a reduced life and may have a detrimental effect on other ESP
components.
The discharge rate of a submersible centrifugal pump depends on the speed (rpm),
stage design, the dynamic head against which the pump is operating, and the physical
properties of the fluid being pumped.  The total dynamic head of the pump is the
product of the number of stages and the head generated by each stage.  Figure-3  is a
typical  6O  hertz,  single  stage,  centrifugal  pump  performance  curve  showing  the
recommended operating range, along with other pump characteristics.
Figure -3
3. Rotary Gas Separator
ESP's can be used in wells having a high gas-oil ratio. The capability of a centrifugal
pump in handling gas without gas-locking is limited. With the attachment of a rotary
gas  separator,  ESP’s  can  work  in  high  gas-oil  ratio  wells.   The  separators  use
centrifugal force to separate the free gas (gas not in solution) from the well fluid before
entry into the pump.         
Figure- 4, represents the common design of a typical rotary gas separator.  The fluid
enters the separator and is forced into a rotating centrifuge chamber by the action of an
inducer.  Once in the centrifuge, the fluid with the higher specificgravity is forced to
the outer wall of the rotating chamber by centrifugal force, leaving the gas in near
9
ELECTRICAL SUBM ERSIBLE PUM P (ESP)
PUMP CHARACTERISTIC CURVE
250--750--
500--1500 --
1250 --
1000 --
050100150200250300350400450500 00-50-100-150OperatingRange
Flowrate m3/day

=== PAGE 10 ===
the center.  The gas is separated from the fluid  by  the  splitter  and  is  exhausted
back to the annulus of the well where it travels up the annulus.  The heavier fluid is
directed into the intake of the pump where it is pumped to the surface.
Typical gas separator efficiencies range from 80% to 95%.  The system efficiency is
affected by fluid volumes, composition and properties.  Gas separator assemblies are
often connected in tandem to improve the overall efficiency in high gas applications.
Figure – 4
 
4. Seal Section
The seal section connects the drive shaft of the motor to the pump or gas separator
shaft and performs the following important functions:
(1). Seal section is to allow for expansion of the dielectric oil contained in the rotor gap
of  the  motor.  Temperature  gradients  resulting  from  both  the  ambient  and  motor
temperature rise will cause the dielectric oil to expand.  This expansion is  taken in the
seal.
(2). Seal section is to equalize the casing annulus pressure with the internal dielectric
motor fluid.  This equalization of pressure across the motor helps keep well fluid from
leaking past the sealed joints of the motor.  Well fluids which get into the motor will
cause early dielectric failure.  The rubber bladder shown in figure -5, as well as the
labyrinth style chambers,  allows this pressure equalization to take place.
10ELECTRICAL SUBM ERSIBLE PUM P (ESP)
ROTARY GAS SEPARATORLIQUID DISCHARGE
GAS DISCHARGE
GAS PORT
BALANCED STEEL ROTOR
STEEL INDUCER
FLUID INTAKEBEARINGFLOW  DIVIDERLIQUID PORTBEARING

=== PAGE 11 ===
(3). Seal section is to isolate the well fluid from the clean dielectric motor fluid.  As
previously stated contamination of the motor insulation with well fluid will lead to
insulation failure.  The seal section contains multiple mechanical shaft seals which keep
the well fluid from leaking down the shaft.  The rubber bladder provides a positive
barrier to the well fluid.  Labyrinth chamber provide fluid separation based on the
difference in densities between well fluid and motor oil. Any well fluid that gets past
the upper shaft seals or the top chamber is contained in the lower labyrinth chambers as
a secondary protection means.
(4). Seal section is to absorb the downthrust of the pump.  This is achieved by a sliding
thrust bearing. The bearing  utilizes a hydrodynamic film of oil to provide lubrication
to the bearing during operation. The downthrust is the result of the pressure developed
by the pump acting across the cross sectional area of the pump shaft and residual thrust
transferred from each individual pump stage impeller to shaft.  Figure -5 shows a cross-
section of the seal section.
Figure - 5
Seal Section Thrust Bearing
11ELECTRICAL SUBMERSIBLE PUMP (ESP)
SEAL SECTION
M ECHANICAL SEAL
ELASTOMER BAG
LABYRINTH CHAM BER
LSBYRINTH CHAMBER
THRUST CHAMBER

=== PAGE 12 ===
Thrust bearing designs are of the tilting pad type.  The bearing consists of 6 to 9
individual shoes which are mounted on a pedestal located at the center of the shoe.  The
pedestal is not so rigid that it cannot deflect and in effect this is what happens.
The operation of any bearing,  is dependent up on the rotating member building and
maintaining an oil film across the bearing surface.  In the case of a tilting pad bearing,
the thrust runner pulls fluid with it across the pad.            In either case, an oil film is
built and maintained otherwise failure of bearing occurs.  The thrust bearing pad's
deflect at the entrance edge, thus allowing the oil film to be built.            An oil film
can  be  maintained  for  only  a  limited  distance  due  to  effects  of  viscosity,  load,
temperature, etc.
5. Electrical Submersible Motor
The ESP motors are  two pole, three-phase, squirrel cage, and induction type.  These
motors are filled with a highly refined mineral oil with high dielectric strength.  The
design and operating voltage of these motors can be as low as 230 volt or as high as
5,000 volt.  Amperage requirement may vary from 12 to 200 amps.  The required
horsepower is achieved by simply increasing the length of the motor section.
The motor is made up of rotors, usually about 12 to 18 inches in length, that are
mounted on a shaft and located in the electrical field (stator) mounted within the steel
housing.  The larger single motor assemblies will approach 33 feet in length and will be
rated up to 400 horsepower while tandem motors will approach 90 feet in length and
will have a rating up to 750 horsepower. Figure -6 displays the stator, rotor and shaft
assembly of a submersible motor.
Figure- 6
12
ESP MOTOR
THRUST RUNNERTHRUST BEARING
MOTOR HEAD
MOTOR LEADS
END COIL
STATOR LAMS
ROTOR
ROTOR BEARING
BRASS LAMS
SHAFT

=== PAGE 13 ===
The stator is made up of a group of individual electromagnets arranged such that they
form a hollow cylinder with one pole of each electromagnet facing toward the center of
the group. While no physical movement of the stator takes place, electrical movement
is created by progressively changing the polarity of the stator poles in such a manner
that their combined magnetic field rotates.  In an AC motor, this is easily achieved
since reversing the current each half-cycle will automatically change the polarity of
each stator pole.
The rotor is also composed of a group of electromagnets arranged in a cylinder with the
poles facing the stator poles.  The rotor rotates simply by magnetic attraction and
repulsion as its poles attempt to follow the rotating electrical field being generated by
the stator.  There is no external connection to the rotor, the current flow through the
rotor's electrical poles is induced by the magnetic field created in the stator.  The speed
at which the stator field rotates is the synchronous speed.  This speed can be computed
with this equation:
N = 120 x f / p
Where:
N = speed in revolutions per minute.
f = frequency in cycles per second.
P = number of magnetic poles within the motor.
Since the number of poles the stator contains is determined by the manufacturer, and
are not easily changed, the only feasible way of changing the speed of the stator
magnetic field is by changing the applied frequency.  The rotor will attempt to follow
the  stator  magnetic  field,  although  due  to  the  resistive  component  in  the  rotor
conductors it lags behind. This lag is usually specified by the manufacturer and is
known  as  slip.  Even  though  the  amount  of  slip  varies  from  manufacturer  to
manufacturer, it is approximately 3% of the motor's synchronous speed.
 6. Motor Controllers
There are two basic types of motor controllers used on ESP operations.  They include
the Fixed Speed Controllers, and Variable Speed Controller (VSC).  Normally, all
utilize solid state circuitry to provide protection, as well as a means of control, for the
ESP system. The controllers vary in physical size, design, and power ratings.
Some  motor  controllers  are  simple  in  design,  while  others  can  be  extremely
sophisticated and complex while offering  numerous options  that  were designed to
enhance the methods of control, protection, and monitoring of the ESP operation.  The
selection of one type versus the other depends on the application, economics and the
preferred method of control.
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
Switchboards (Fixed Speed)
The switchboard (across-the-line starter) consist of a motor starter, solid state overload
and underload protection, a manual disconnect switch or circuit break circuitry and a
recording  ammeter.   Many  control  systems  have  surface  equipment  for  use  with
bottom-hole pressure and temperature monitoring equipment installed within the motor
controller cabinet.  Fuses are provided for short circuit protection.
External  control  devices should be interfaced  with the controller  as recommended
and/or  approved  by  the  pump  manufacturer  to  give  dependable  and  trouble-free
operation. All external control devices are connected to a time-delay which activates or
deactivates the controller after a short time delay.  Usual external control devices are
separator high/low level controls or flowline pressure switches.
Most solid state controllers offer time delayed underload protection on all three phases,
time delayed overload protection, and automatic protection against voltage or current
unbalance. Underload, or some type of pump off protection, is necessary since low
flow past the motor will not give adequate cooling.  Circuits designed for automatic
restart after shut down are normally included.
7. Variable Speed Controller (VSC)
The Electrical Submersible Pump is very often not flexible when run at a fixed speed;
the unit is limited to a fixed range of production rates and a fixed head output at each
rate.  The Variable Speed Controller (VSC) is designed to overcome these restrictions.
By allowing the pump speed to be varied, the rate, the head or both can be adjusted,
depending on the application, with no modification of the downhole unit. 
The basic operation of the VSC is to convert the incoming 3 phase AC power, typically
at 415 volts, to a single DC power supply.  Then using power semiconductors as solid
state switches, it sequentially inverts this DC supply to regenerate three AC output
phases  of  pseudo-sinewave  power,  whose  frequency  and  voltage  are  controllable.
Pumping flexibility was the main purpose of applying the VSC to the ESP, but several
other benefits have become apparent.  Of particular interest are those that can extend
downhole  equipment  life;  soft  start,  automatically  controlled  speed,  line-transient
suppression and the elimination of surface chokes.          
The VSC isolates the load from incoming switching and lightning transients; balances
output volts to reduce motor heating; ignores frequency instability from generator
supplies; compensates for brown outs or takes the unit off line; and minimizes starting
stresses.  In addition depending on the application, VSC's can improve overall system
efficiency, reduce required size of generator, obviate the need for a choke, reduce
downhole unit size and provide intelligent control functions to maximize production.
All these benefits cannot be simultaneously available; however, the user must pick and
chose the combination relevant to his application.
14

=== PAGE 15 ===
8. Downhole Pressure and Temperature Monitor
Reservoir  and pump performance  data can be acquired  with the use of  downhole
pressure and temperature monitoring systems.  By correlating reservoir pressure with
the  pumping  rate,  an  operator  can  determine  when  to  change  pump  size,  change
injection rate or consider well workover.
Many  types  of  downhole  pressure  and  temperature  sensors  are  available  from
submersible pump suppliers.  These systems vary in design, cost, accuracy, reliability,
operation and capabilities.  A typical system has the capability of (1) continuously
monitoring bottom hole pressure and temperature, (2) providing detection of electrical
failures, and (3) can be interfaced with the Variable Speed Controllers to regulate
speed.
9. Transformer
The distribution of electrical power to the oil fields is usually accomplished at an
intermediate  voltage,  such  as  33KV.   Since  ESP  equipment  operates  at  voltages
between 1000 and 3300 volts, transformation of the distribution voltage is required.
Transformers are commonly provided in either a bank of three single phases or in a
single three-phase configuration.  These transformers are usually oil-filled, self cooled
15G E N E R A T O R11/132K VT R A N SF O R M E R132 / 33 kVT R A N SF O R M E R
33 k V  / 3.3 kVT R A N SF O R M E R
F IX E D SP E E D33 / 0.415 k V
T R A N SF O R M E R
0.415 k V  / 3.3 k VT R A N SF O R M E R
V A R IA B L E  SP E E DR E C T IFIE R
IN V E R T E RE SP  P O W E R  SU P P L Y
G
E SP
E S PT R A N S M ISSIO NM A IN
D IS T R IB U T IO NL O C A L
G

=== PAGE 16 ===
units and are unusual from the standpoint that they contain a substantial number of
secondary voltage taps which allow a wide range of output voltages.  This wide range
of voltages is required in order to be able to adjust the surface voltage for a variety of
cable voltage drops that can occur due to varying setting depths.
10. Junction Box
The  junction  box  (sometimes  called  a  "Vent  Box”)  performs  three  functions:
(1) provides a point to connect the power cable from the controller to power cable from
the well (2) provides a vent to the atmosphere for any gas that might migrate up the
submersible  power  cable  and  (3)  provides  for  easily  accessible  test  points  for
electrically checking downhole equipment.
11. Wellhead
The wellhead is designed to support the weight of the subsurface equipment and is used
to maintain surface annular control of the well.  They must be equipped with a tubing
head bonnet or pack-off which provides for a positive seal around the cable and the
tubing, or a feed through mandrel. There are several   methods available from wellhead
manufacturers for providing this pack-off.  Depending on the method used, the pack-
off can sustain annular pressures up to 5,000 psi.
Figure – 7
Figure – 7 shows wellhead equipment of a Variable Speed Controlled ESP well.
The cable should be properly laid   in a cable rack or buried for safety reason.
The control panel should be minimum of 15 m away from the x-mass tree.
16WELLHEAD
CONDUITVARIBLE
SPEED DRIVE
PANELSTEP UP
TRANSFORMER
VENTED
JN BOX
BURIEDCABLE
15 m minimumCable
rackCABLE to
TUBING

=== PAGE 17 ===
12. Check Valve
Check valve which is usually fixed 2 to 3 joints above the pump assembly, can be used
to maintain a full column of fluid above the pump.  If the check valve fails or if it is
not installed, leakage of fluid down the tubing through the pump can cause a reverse
rotation of the subsurface unit when the motor is shut off.  Start-up during the reverse
rotation can result in a motor burn, cable burn or broken shaft.
If  a check valve is not provided, sufficient time must be allowed for the tubing to drain
back through the pump before the motor is restarted.   A minimum of thirty (30)
minutes is typically recommended.
13. Drain Valve
When a check valve is used in the tubing, it is necessary to install a drain valve
immediately above the check valve to prevent pulling a wet tubing string.  If a check
valve is not provided, there is no reason to provide a drain valve, as the fluid in the
tubing will generally drain through the pump while pulling.
14. Backspin Relay
In some cases installation of a check valve is impractical.  For example, if you were
anticipating that the subsurface equipment could plug up with scale, sand, asphaltines,
etc., it may be desirable to pump produced fluid, acids or other chemicals down the
tubing to remove the foreign material.  With a permanent check valve installed in the
tubing, this would not be possible.
There are electronic devices available  that can detect a pump backspinning and will
prevent restarting an ESP during this condition.  The backspin relay electronics are
provided in the controller and the unit is connected electrically to the ESP power cable.
When the ESP system shuts down, and the produced fluid is allowed to fall back down
the tubing, power is being generated by the motor and this power can be detected by
the backspin relay, preventing any attempt to restart until this condition stops.
15. Centralizer
Centralizers are used in ESPs to place the equipment in the centre of the wellbore,
especially useful in deviated wells, to eliminate external damage and insure proper
cooling of the equipment.  Many types of centralizers available in the industry designed
to protect the ESP cable and prevent cable damage due to rubbing.
In  corrosive  conditions  where  coatings  are  used  to  protect  the  O.D.  of  the  ESP
equipment, centralizers can be very effective in preventing mechanical damage to the
coating during the installation of the equipment. If the coating is damaged during
17

=== PAGE 18 ===
installation,  the  corrosion  accelerates  at  the  point  of  damage  and  the  life  of  the
equipment will be affected.
16. Cable
Electric  supply  is  transmitted  to  the  submersible  motor  by  banding  a  specially
constructed three phase electric power cable to the production tubing.  This cable must
be  small  in  diameter,  well  protected  from  mechanical  damage  and  impervious  to
deterioration  of  its  physical  and  electrical  properties  by  the  hot  corrosive  well
environments.
Cables  are  available  in  a  wide  range  of  sizes,  which  permits  matching  to  motor
requirements.  They are either round or flat configurations using galvanized steel,
stainless steel, or monel armor capable of withstanding the hostile environments of an
oil well or water well.  All cables are made to strict specifications using specially
formulated materials for different operating environments
Figure - 8
17. Cable Bands
Cable bands are used to strap the power cable to the tubing. One band per 5m interval
is normally used.  Cable bands are also used to strap the motor flat cable to the pump
and seal.  Use of one band per 50cm, protected with flat cable guards, is recommended
for maximum support and protection. Cable bands are made of carbon steel, stainless
18
CABLE
ROUND CABLE FLAT CABLE

=== PAGE 19 ===
steel and monel.  The materials also vary in width and thickness, providing additional
strength and support.
Figure- 9
19CABLE BAND
DIFFERENT TYPES OF BANDS
