=== PAGE 1 ===
Recommended Practice for Electrical 
Submersible Pump Installations
API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 11S3
SECOND EDITION, MARCH 1999
REAFFIRMED, OCTOBER 2013

=== PAGE 2 ===


=== PAGE 3 ===
Recommended Practice for Electrical 
Submersible Pump Installations
Upstream Segment
API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 11S3
SECOND EDITION, MARCH 1999
REAFFIRMED, OCTOBER 2013

=== PAGE 4 ===
SPECIAL NOTES 
API publications necessarily address problems of a general nature. With respect to partic- 
ular circumstances, local, state, and federal laws and regulations should be reviewed. 
API is not undertaking to meet the duties of employers, manufacturers, or suppliers to 
warn and properly train and equip their employees, and others exposed, concerning health 
and safety risks and precautions, nor undertaking their obligations under local, state, or fed- 
eral laws. 
Information concerning safety and health risks and proper precautions with respect to par- 
ticular materials and conditions should be obtained from the employer, the manufacturer or 
supplier of that material, or the material safety data sheet. 
Nothing contained in any API publication is to be construed as granting any right, by 
implication or otherwise, for the manufacture, sale, or use of any method, apparatus, or prod- 
uct covered by letters patent. Neither should anything contained in the publication be con- 
strued as insuring anyone against liability for infringement of letters patent. 
Generally, API standards are reviewed and revised, reamed, or withdrawn at least every 
five years. Sometimes a one-time extension of up to two years will be added to this review 
cycle. This publication will no longer be in effect five years after its publication date as an 
operative API standard or, where an extension has been granted, upon republication. Status 
of the publication can be ascertained from the API Upstream Segment [telephone (202) 682- 
80001. A catalog of API publications and materials is published annually and updated quar- 
terly by API, 1220 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005. 
This document was produced under API standardization procedures that ensure appropri- 
ate notification and participation in the developmental process and is designated as an API 
standard. Questions concerning the interpretation of the content of this standard or com- 
ments and questions concerning the procedures under which this standard was developed 
should be directed in writing to the director of the Upstream Segment, American Petroleum 
Institute, 1220 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005. Requests for permission to repro- 
duce or translate all or any part of the material published herein should also be addressed to 
the director. 
API standards are published to facilitate the broad availability of proven, sound engineer- 
ing and operating practices. These standards are not intended to obviate the need for apply- 
ing sound engineering judgment regarding when and where these standards should be 
utilized. The formulation and publication of API standards is not intended in any way to 
inhibit anyone from using any other practices. 
Any manufacturer marking equipment or materials in conformance with the marking 
requirements of an API standard is solely responsible for complying with all the applicable 
requirements of that standard. API does not represent, warrant, or guarantee that such prod- 
ucts do in fact conform to the applicable API standard. 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without prior written permission from the publisher: Contact the Publishel; 
API Publishing Services, 1220 L Street, N. IT, Washington, D. C. 20005. 
Copyright O 1999 American Petroleum Institute 
