=== PAGE 1 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Electrical Submersible Pump 
Dismantle, Inspection  and 
Failure Analysis  
 
 
  
API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 11S1 
FOURTH  EDITION, XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX,  202X  
   

=== PAGE 2 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 1 Scope  
 
This recommended practice (RP) covers the processes and procedures of  
collecting  required  information to complete a root cause failure analysis of an 
electric al submersible pump (ESP)  system.  These include:   
 
− Procedures for disassembly, inspection, final report, failure classification 
and corrective actions. Items covered by this recommended practice 
include pumps, intakes, gas separators, gas handling devices, seals/protectors , motors (induction and permanent m agnet motors), 
gauges, sensors, motor lead extensions, potheads, and power cables.   
Tooling and test equipment may differ between suppliers; however, the typical assembly and inspection procedures and principles are generally applicable for most ESP system s. 
 
− Information  that should be collect ed prior to equipment dismantle and 
inspection as well as specific observations that should be recorded during 
equipment inspections /teardown/disassembly .   
 
− General equipment drawings which may aid in identifying equi pment 
components. It should be noted that these drawings are for generic 
equipment components, and there may be differences between manufacturers on the exact description or configuration of the assemblies.   
The user should refer to the manufacturer’s specific drawings as needed.  
 This RP does not include gauge surface electronics, system grounding, alternative 
deployed systems, chemical injection systems, motor oil injection from surface, 
remote gauges, generators , power supply , wellhead , trees & valves, tubing , tail-
pipe systems, operation maintenance and troubleshooting, pump testing, 
installation , sizing and selection , application of ESP cable systems, testing of ESP 
cable systems, application and testing of seals/protector s, sand handling devices, 
ESP system vibrations or items covered by other API r ecommended practices.  
 
 
2 Normative References  
 
The following documents are referred to in the text in such a way that some or all of their content 
constitutes requirements of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. 
For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any addenda) applies.  
 ASTM D877/D877M, Standard Test Method for Dielectric Breakdown Voltage of Insulating 
Liquids Using Disk Electrodes  

=== PAGE 3 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 ASTM D1533, Standard Test Method for Water in Insulating Liquids by Coulometric Karl Fischer 
Titration  
 
 
3 Terms, Definitions and Abbreviations  
3.1 Terms and Definitions  
For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.  
 
3.1.1   
Bag Chamber  
A seal / protector chamber that relies on an elastomer barrier (bag) to isolate seal fluid from the 
well fluid.   
NOTE  The seal / protector may include multiple chambers connected in parallel or series.   
 
3.1.2   
Balance Ring  
On a mixed flow stage, this ring projects upward from the upper shroud and seals off the top of the 
impeller from its discharge.  It can also function as a radial bearing surface and/or a place to drill holes when physically balancing the impeller.  Balance rings and balance holes are only used on 
the higher flow rate stages within a series.  
 
3.1.3   
Bands  
The material used to secure the cable to the tubing.   
 
3.1.4   
Cable Splice  
The joining of two sections of power cable as required for the full length to electrical submersible 
pump ( ESP)  set depth.  
 3.1.5   
Center Tandem Motor  
CT Motor  
A motor with a head designed to connect to the bottom of an upper tandem, or center tandem motor 
and a base designed to connect to another center tandem motor, a lower tandem,  or a universal 
base.  All flange connections have provision for connecting the corresponding windings to those of 
the adjacent motors.  
 
3.1.6   
Center Tandem Pump  
CT Pump  
A pump with flange connections which allow any number of sections to be connected in tandem.  
Also, a discharge head, intake or gas separator may be attached to the pump.  
 
3.1.7   
Compression  
All impellers are locked hub to hub and to the shaft.  All stage and shaft thrust are transferred to 
the seal / protector thrust bearing.  Typically applied when abrasives are present, when low lubricity 
fluids (Propane, NGL etc.) are being pumped and in pump series larger than 538 series.  

=== PAGE 4 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 3.1.8   
Compression Nut  
The nut used on a bottom floater  or compression pump to lock / compress the impellers hub to hub.  
 
3.1.9   
Compression Tube  
A tube, generally stainless steel, closely fit to the inside of the pump housing located between the 
head and the upper diffuser.  The compression tube is "cut -to-fit" such that  the length is longer than 
the space between the pump head and top diffuser.  The length will compress the diffusers and lock them in place to prevent rotation.  The length is unique for each stage type and manufacturer.  
  
NOTE  A typical value may be 0.00 15" to 0.002" of additional length per pump stage in the pump.  
 
3.1.10   
Coupling  
A device which connects one shaft to another shaft, usually to transfer torque from one to the other.  
  
3.1.11   
Diffusers  
The stationary part of the stage that converts the velocity head generated by the impeller into static 
head (pressure) and guides the fluid into the next impeller.  
 
3.1.12   
Discharge Head  
The component connected the upper pump that allows the ESP to be connected to the tubing.  
 3.1.13   
Down Tube  
A component (communicati on tube) in a seal/protector.  
 
3.1.14   
Down -Thrust Washer  
A washer used as the bearing surface on the bottom of the impeller.   
 
NOTE  This is generally fabric -filled phenolic material, however other materials are sometimes 
used.  
 
3.1.15   
Encapsulated Stator  
A method of stabilizing, protecting, insulating the motor windings.   
 
NOTE  The encapsulating material will vary between manufacturers.  
 
3.1.16   
Head  
Pressure, generally expressed in feet of lift , of produced fluid.  
 3.1.17   
Head and Base  
The machined part that finishes the top and bottom of each equipment (DMS, motor, seal / protector, 
gas separator, pump).  

=== PAGE 5 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 3.1.18   
Impeller  
The rotating part of the stage that adds velocity and head to the pumped fluid using centrifugal force.  
 
3.1.19   
Junction Box  
The connection point for the cable from the s witchgear to the surface cable.  
 3.1.20   
Labyrinth Chamber  
A seal / protector chamber designed for wells where the well fluid is denser than the motor oil and 
relies on the difference between their densities and their relative immiscibility.   
 
NOTE  The seal / pr otector may include multiple chambers connected in series.  
 
3.1.21   
Loss of Lubricity  
The oil -film between the runner and associated thrust bearing.   
 3.1.22   
Lower Pigtail Splice  
The splice from the pigtail (typically connected to the wellhead penetrator at the lower end of the 
tubing hanger to the main power cable.  
 3.1.23   
Lower Tandem Motor  
LT Motor  
A motor with a head designed to connect to the bottom of an upper tandem or center tandem motor 
and an integral "Y" connection at the bottom connecting the windings toget her. 
 
3.1.24   
Lower Tandem (LT) Pump  
LT Pump  
A pump with a built -in intake.  
 3.1.25   
Magnet Wire  
mag wire  
Copper wire used to wind and form the motor stator coils.  
 
3.1.26   
Manufacturing Quality  
The manufacturer's specific quality and quality program.  
 3.1.27   
Mixed Flow  
Fluid flowi ng through mixed flow stages moves both radially and axially at the same time.  
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 3.1.28   
Motor Lead Extension  
MLE  
A special clearance parallel conductor cable used to go alongside the pump and protector to the 
motor and is spliced to the main power cable above the pump discharge head.  The MLE will have 
the pothead incorporated on the lower end.   
 
NOTE  Also see flat cable extension ( FCE) in Annex A . 
 
3.1.29   
O-Ring  
A doughnut -shaped rubber ring seal between two pieces of equipment.   
 3.1.30   
O-ring Boss  
The area where the O -ring engages and provides a seal.  
 3.1.31   
O-Ring Groove  
The groove that holds the O -ring in place.  
 
3.1.32   
O-Ring Surface  
The mating (sealing) surface used to compress and seal against the O -ring. 
 
3.1.33   
Phase to Ground  
The electrical reading used to measure electrical insulation resistance for an ESP motor, cable, or 
overall ESP system.  Expressed in a value of Ohms, Meg Ohms or Gig Ohms.  
 
3.1.34   
Phase to Phase  
The electrical reading used to measure resistance between motor, or motor with cable connected 
phases (A -B, A- C, and B -C). 
 
3.1.35   
Proportional Integral Derivative  
PID 
A control method utilized in variable speed drives ( VSDs ) to automatically control the ESP to 
maintain a target operating parameter.  
 3.1.36   
Pigtail  
The clip- on extension leads used in performing electrical tests.  
 3.1.37   
Pitting  
Voids in the material, usually caused by rust and corrosion.  
 

=== PAGE 7 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 3.1.38   
Porosity  
Voids or bubbles in a casting, typically the impeller or diffuser.  
 
3.1.39   
Pothead  
The connector on the lower end of the MLE (Motor Lead Extension) that makes the mechanical 
and electrical connection to the motor.  
 
3.1.40   
Pull Report  
The document filled out by a field service technician that documents the removal of an ESP system.  
 
NOTE  Also see Pull and Run Report  in Annex A.  
 
3.1.41   
Pump Stage  
A combination of th e impeller and diffuser.  
 
3.1.42   
Rotor  
The part of the rotating assembly in the motor that provides a magnetic field generated either by 
an electromagnetic circuit (ex.: squirrel -cage or wound rotor) or by permanents magnets. The 
torque produced at the shaft is a result of the interaction between that magnetic field and the one 
produced by the stator.  
 3.1.43   
Rotor Bearings  
Bearing race for shaft sleeve used at each end of each rotor to center the rotor in the bore of the 
stator.  
 
3.1.44   
Rotor End Ring  
An electric conductive ring at both ends of the induction motor’s rotor, which c onnects the rotor 
bars end together.  
 
3.1.45   
Seal/Protector  
The component used in an ESP to protect the motor, prevent well fluid entry, and equalize pressure 
from the motor to the wellbore.  
 
3.1.46   
Shaft Play  
The movement of a shaft (typically axial but may also be radial movement.  
 3.1.47   
Shaft Setting  
The amount of movement and shaft end location of the shaft as per manufacturing guidelines . 
 
NOTE  May also be described as axial play.  

=== PAGE 8 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
3.1.48   
Shaft Tube  
The tube that covers the shaft in a seal/protector.  
 
3.1.49   
Stage  
A single impeller and a diffuser set.  
 3.1.50   
Standard Intake  
Provides intake holes and screens for center or upper tandem pump sections (which end with a 
simple male flange).  
 3.1.51   
Stator  
The stationary part of the motor comprising the stator lamination and the stationary three- phase 
magnet wire windings and winding leads (brush wire).  
 
3.1.52   
Stator Lamination  
Lams  
Thin steel plates stacked together to form along with the three- phase stator winding, the stator’s 
magnetic circuit.  
 3.1.53   
Time domain reflectometer  
TDR 
A meth od used to determine electrical fault location(s).  
 
3.1.54   
Thrust Bearing  
The bearing that carries the axial load.  
 
3.1.55   
Trend Analysis  
The method for analyzing ESP performance using operating parameter trends over a period.  
Generally, consists of multiple parameters.  
 
3.1.56   
Two-Piece Coupling  
A coupling that is comprised of two pieces so that different shaft diameters are coupled together.  
 3.1.57   
Two-Piece Ring  
A split ring used in various forms in many different pieces of equipment where high thrust loads are 
be transmitted to or from the shaft.  
 

=== PAGE 9 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 3.1.58  Universal Base  
A base which bolts onto the bottom of an upper tandem or center tandem motor to make the "Y" 
connection at the bottom connecting the windings together and to isolate the motor from the well 
bore fluid.  
 
3.1.59   
Upper Shroud  
The portion of the impeller which forms the top of the flow passages.  
 3.1.60   
Upper Tandem Motor  
UT Motor  
A motor with a head made to accept the power cable connection on top and either a center tandem 
motor, lower tandem motor, a DMS or universal bas e on the bottom.  
 
3.1.61   
Upper Tandem Pump  
UT Pump  
A pump with a built -in discharge head.  
 3.1.62   
Variable Speed Drive  
VSD 
Allows the user to vary motor and pump rotating speed by varying the Hz/frequency of the motor 
electric frequency provided to the motor, even if the energy comes from a constant frequency power 
supply.  
 
NOTE  Or Variable Frequency Drive(VFD ). 
 
3.2 Abbreviations  
BHT Bottom Hole Temperature  
DIFA  Dismantle, Inspection and Failure Analysis  
ESP Electrical Submer sible Pump 
FTP Flowing Tubing Pressure, at surface  
FTT Flowing Tubing Temperature, at surface  
MLE Motor Lead Extension  
PI Productivity Index, barrels per day ( BPD)/psi 
PID Proportional Integral Derivative  
PIP Pump Intake Pressure  
POOH  Pull Out of Hole  
Pr Reservoir Pressure (static and flowing ) 
PSI Pounds Per Square Inch  
RIH Run in Hole  
SC Silicon Carbide  
SCADA  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  
SS Stainless Steel  
SSHB  Stainless Steel Head and Base 
T Temperature  
Tr Reservoir Temperature  
TDR Time domain reflectometer  
VSD Variable Speed Drive  
 

=== PAGE 10 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
4 Health Safety and Environmental (HSE)   
4.1 General  
 
Health, safety, and environmental hazards and procedures are not part of the 
scope of this RP and will not be addressed except in certain special cases.  It is the responsibility of the entity performing the inspection and failure analysis to ensure that appropriate HSE, regul atory, and governmental guidelines are 
adhered to.  Be sure to perform  a tailgate safety meeting prior to dismantle.  
 
 CAUTION:  
Common hazards that may be identified include but are not limited to:  
− Inhalation injury from Hydrogen Sulfide (H
2S) 
− Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material  
− Poison from i norganic hazards such as arsenic  or others  
− Physical injury from trapped pressure  
− Burns or eye injury from flying sparks during cutting  
− Electric shock during electrical tests  
− Laceration from s harp ESP pa rts and  cutting equipment  
− Impact from h ighly torqued components  having  stored energy  
 At all times,  the user should adhere to safe practices regarding these hazards  
and closely follow  the supplier/manufacturer’s guidelines and policies.  All 
appropriate safety precautions should be undertaken . 
 
4.2 Lifting and Handling 
 To avoid injury, use appropriate lift aids and techniques.  Suppliers/manufacturers established practices should be reviewed and followed in all cases.  
 
4.3 Clear and Clean Work Areas  
 A properly organized work area ensures safety of the workers present and an accurate assessment of the failed equipment.   
 
4.4 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
 PPE should always be worn in designated areas and as directed by worksite facility personnel.  Different facilities may have different requirements for PPE so coordinate with local HSE representative(s) for specific requirements.  At a 

=== PAGE 11 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 minimum, hand protection, eye protection and H 2S and radiation monitors 
should be used.   
 
4.5 Dedicated Work Areas  
 
It is recommended that a dedicated workspace be provided for dismantle and inspection along with the appropriate tooling and personnel.  Additionally, it is 
recommended that a dedicated office space be provided to the users.   
  
5 ESP Pulling – Activities and Observations  
 
5.1 General  
 Observations, evidence, and data collected during the ESP pulling activity can be 
very important as part of the overall failure analysis.  When pulling the ESP from 
the well the following processes/procedures are recommended.  
 
5.2 Pre-pulling Procedural Guidelines  
 
The following should be completed pri or to pulling the ESP from the wellbore:    
 
− Ensure that all required safety processes and procedures are being followed.  
− Ensure that all ESP manufacturer recommended practices are observed during operations.  
− Take care in ESP cable spooler and sheave placem ent to ensure that ESP 
cable is not damaged during pulling operations.   
− Cable clamps and/or bands should be properly removed and stored for possible additional inspection.  Cable clamps and banks shall be counted,  
and counts compared to installation repor t.  Any missing clamps shall be 
noted, including location (measure depth or joint count) where clamp should have been.  Any damage to cable clamps/bands shall  be noted including 
the measure depth or joint count where damage was observed.   
− ESP power cable( s) shall be visually inspected,  and any damage noted 
including the measure depth or joint count where damage was observed.   
− ESP equipment should be pulled out of hole at a safe speed.  Speeds in 
excess of 1000 ft/hour  should be closely monitored.  If cabl e decompression 
is observed during pulling operations (noted by “popping” sounds from the cable) then pulling speed should be slowed.   
− Take photographs of any unusual findings during pulling operations.   

=== PAGE 12 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 − During ESP equipment dismantle ensure that all acc essories including 
couplings are kept for evaluation.  Couplings, where possible, should be left 
installed on the base of the equipment and secured with a shipping cap.   
  
5.3 Recommended Observations During Pulling Operations  
 To support the failure analysis process,  it is important to ensure good observations 
of the pulled ESP equipment taken as the equipment comes of the well and is laid down on the rig floor.  Observations to be taken include the following:  
 
− Record unique identifiers ( i.e., serial numbers) and system location of each 
ESP component.   
− Wellhead Penetrator / Lower Connector:  Obtain and record electrical 
conductivity readings phase- to-phase and insulation  resistance phase- to-
ground for all three phases.  Ensure that penetrator and lower connector 
are tagged and shipped back with ESP components for further inspection.   
− Packer Electrical Penetrator Mandrel Connectors:  Obtain and record electrical conductivity readings phase- to-phase and insulation resistance 
phase -to-ground for all three phases.  Ensure that mandrel and connectors 
are tagged and shipped back with ESP components for further inspection.  
− Any significant mechanical damage ( i.e., drag marks, impacts, vibration 
marks, bent housings or necks) . Include p hotographs.  
− Indications of leaks at joints and/or plugs including flange connections noting any observed improper make- up of connections.   
− Scale or substance build- up on or in equipment.  If possible, collect sample s 
and store in properly identified container to be forwarded with equipment.  
− Debris or foreign material buildup  in or on equipment openings or housings.   
− Any signs of external corrosion  
− Any signs of damage / breaches in production tubing and/or capillary lines.    
− Any signs of excessive heat o n ESP equipment housings.  
− Examine O-rings  and other seals at flange connection points and record 
any signs of leakage, deformation,  or damage.  
− Intake Screens:  If the ESP component has an intake screen, observe its 
condition noting any signs of  foreign material,  deformation,  or damage.  
− Rotate equipment shafts to determine if rotation is free, shafts are intact and 
noting any significant side play.  Shaft rotation should be checked from top of ESP system while still assembled (hanging in rig) and then again when 
components are disassembled after laying down.   
− Pumps:  When shaft shims are used, ensure that all shims are collected, bagged,  or otherwise secured, component location identified and placed in 
the base of the component along with the com ponent coupling.  If shim bolts 
are used,  they should remain in place and not removed.   

=== PAGE 13 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 − Motor Protectors / Seal Chamber Sections:  Where/when possible and if 
safe to do, collect fluid samples from each chamber.  Identify the location of the collection poi nt and label sample bottle with identifying information ( i.e., 
well location, equipment serial number, chamber, date).  Fluid samples shall  
be returned with equipment for further inspection. If/when plugs are removed to collect samples observe presence of and condition of seals for damage ( i.e., over-compression).  
− Motor(s):  Cut off motor lead extension ( MLE) approximately 12 –  18 in. 
above the pothead and DO NOT disconnect from motor.  Ensure the MLE “stub” is laid flat onto the motor housing and secured t o avoid damage.  
− Motor(s):  Obtain and record electrical conductivity readings phase- to-
phase and insulation resistance phase- to-ground for all three phases from 
the cut -off MLE location or the head of the center / lower tandem motor 
terminals.      
− Motor(s ):  Where/when possible and if safe to do, collect fluid samples from 
each chamber.  Identify the location of the collection point and label sample bottle with identifying information ( i.e., well location, equipment serial 
number, chamber, date).  Fluid samples shall be returned with equipment 
for further inspection.  If/when plugs are removed to collect samples observe presence of and condition of seals for damage ( i.e., over-
compression).  
− Cable(s):  Obtain and record electrical conductivity readings phase- to-
phase and insulation resistance phase- to-ground for all three phases.  
− Cable(s):  Visually inspect and note any damage (mechanical or electrical) along cable and including splice locations.  Note and record any  
observations including the measure depth or joint count where damage was observed.   
− Ancillary Equipment ( i.e., shrouds, de- sanders):  Note and record any 
observations relating to damage, scale and/or substance build- up or 
deposits .   
An ESP pulling checklist can be found in Annex B for further reference and to 
assist in developing applicable ESP pulling procedures  
 
6 General P re-inspection Information Gathering and 
Guidelines  
6.1 General  
 The list below is intended to assist the user in a comprehensive review to determine root cause.    While the ultimate root cause may not be fully identified, a 
thorough review of the data will allow the user to list the most likely causes for failure.  These causes can then be used  to improve overall ESP performance.  
 

=== PAGE 14 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 NOTE :  Most often, all the ESP equipment is prepared for dismantling although there is 
frequently not time to do the entire string as the focus is on failed component(s) and then 
to scrap the rest.  By looking intensively at components af ter short run, specific of failure 
modes for that component and in that well can be identified.  A broader look at all ESPs  
in a particular field might gain a better perspective of failure issues, however.  The majority of ESP's do not go thr ough any inspection process other than to separate 
components by scrap bin.  We are living in data intensive times which helps us to lear n 
the life cycle of ESP's to better understand potential lessons learned.  Collecting data on 
this very last step of ESP life cycle is worth the effort to tie back to collected data on 
ESP's operation.  Each ESP vendor does DIFA's and scrap differently so it is important 
to see what each can offer in a "DIFA -lite" option(s) for pumps sent directly to scrap.   
 
 
6.2 Preparation  
 
6.2.1  General  
 
Electrical submersible pumping systems may stop operating,  or not operate as 
expected,  for a variety of reasons. Improper identification of the root cause(s) in 
many cases can result in frequent and repeat failures. This may be due to many 
factors that are not investigated, misinterpreted,  or are not properly  documented. 
Unfortunately , the initial problem , or a failed component discovered during the 
failure investigation of an ESP system , may be prematurely assigned full 
“responsibility” for the failure although it is not the “root cause” or basis of the 
problem but the result of the root cause(s). It is impe rative to not only identify the 
root cause(s) of failure but also to identify the lagging failures.  Lagging failures are issues that would have led to a subsequent failure had the primary root cause not been present.   
 Schedul e the dismantle and inspecti on as soon as possible after the ESP is pulled 
to minimize loss of information.  Th e root cause investigation process can take 
days or weeks .  Many factors impact the timeliness of determining the root cause. 
Factors that should be considered are (but not limited to):  
a) Application and design . 
b) Materials selection.  
c) Manufacturing practices and quality  
d) Shipping and handling.  
e) Installation practices . 
f) Startup  practices and procedure.  
g) Production operations . 
h) Operating practice.  
i) Optimization . 
j) Pulling practices . 
k) Transportation to DIFA facility . 
l) Pre-DIFA  data capture . 

=== PAGE 15 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
Proper preparation is required for  effective failure analysis.  The following 
information should be collected and available during the process .  This 
recommended practice recognizes that all items may not be available for each failure analysis.      
6.2.2  ESP Design  & Application 
 
Well and ESP system compatibility and design parameters : 
a) Operator design request and information provided that the design was based 
on. 
b) Supplier detailed design report and recommendations . 
c) Well and ESP system model alternatives for time intervals with expected well condition changes as appropriate.  
d) ESP’s components technical specification.  
e) Wellbore survey (dogleg/deviation survey) . 
6.2.3  ESP Manufacturing  
 Manufacturing factory acceptance testing reports : 
a) Pump performance test . 
b) Motor performance test . 
c) Protector/seal performance test . 
d) Other relevant test and assembly check list compliance reports . 
e) Manufacturing quali ty records, as may be applicable including confirmation 
of component shaft settings.  
 
6.2.4  Shipping and Handling Information 
 
Shipping and handling information as listed below : 
 
a) Information regarding package and transport methods . 
b) Information describing how the equipment was secured for transport such as  
in shipping box, strapped to truck/trailer bed, loaded in containers, properly 
loaded in shipping baskets, etc.) . 
c) Handling methods including procedures used for  loading and unloading 
equipment such as  lifting points, cranes, forklift, spreader bars, etc.  
d) Information related to the shock sensors, if used.  
 
6.2.5  Rig Operations  
 
The following information should be observed during rig operations.  However, 
prior to the start of rig operations,  check for dangerous voltages prior to testing for 

=== PAGE 16 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 resistance values, even if the VSD is isolated.  Some ESP systems such as those 
with permanent magnet motors have electric shock potentially injurious to service personnel.   
Historical data from previous installations and pulls  should be available.  
Items that should be included:  
a) Data collection and observations, if any, before and during the installation of the equipment.  
b) Pulling observations (see Annex B) shall include  at a minimum:  
1) Review and inspect wellsite for any physical damage.   
2) Download data from the variable speed drive ( VSD) or 
switchboard motor controller . 
3) Review of installation report data and confirm 
equipment being pulled.  
4) Obtain and r ecord ESP system electrical conductivity 
readings phase- to-phase and insulation resistance phase- to-
ground for all three phases . 
i. At the VSD / switchboard . 
ii. At the transformer . 
iii. At the junction box . 
iv. At the wellhead.  
v. Below the tubing hanger . 
vi. At any power cable interval deemed necessary during the pulling operation.  
5) Inspection of cable.   
i. Mechanical damage.  
ii. Other damage from corrosion or other wellbore issues . 
iii. Inspection of splice(s) . 
iv. Observe any damage from clamps or bands . 
6) Observations for debris at or near any component of 
the ESP assembly . 
7) Observations of shaft rotation . 
8) Observations of flange areas for debris, damage, 
erosion and/or corrosion.  
9) Observations of couplings . 
10) Observations of motor lead extension (MLE) area.  
11) Observations for any indicators of h eat such as 
discolored, charred,  or melted materials . 
12) Observations for materials shifted due to pressure 
transient during burn event . 
13) Observation of the MLE to motor pothead interface and 
connection.  
i. It is recommended that the pothead remain plugged into the motor during the pulling operation.  The MLE 

=== PAGE 17 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 should be cut approximately 2 Ft (0.5m) above the 
pothead with that short length shipped carefully with 
motor without bending stress.   
14) Collect and observe condition of motor and 
protector/seal oil samples.  In some cases, it may be advisable 
to not collect oil samples at the time of pulling.  This decision should be made by prior agreement of operator, service company and rig operator as part of standard pull procedures or case -by-case.  
15) Observation of ESP gauge.  
16) Observation of other completion components such as 
solids separation devices, packers, safety valves, control lines, Y-tools, flow assurance devices, etc.  
17) Observations relating to workover activities such as 
cable spooling, workover rig, other service support, etc.  
18) Observations relating to rig procedures such as kill 
fluids to determine how pump became plugged, how fast pull out of hole ( POOH ) to understand cable, seal elastomer 
decompression damage.   
c) Photographs during the installation and pull should be included in the installation and pull reports . 
d) Photographs of equipment as it arrives at teardown location.   
6.2.6  Production Operations  
 The following items sh ould be collected from production operations.   
 
a) Any well work data:  
1) Completion details . 
2) Previous installations .  
3) Any wellbore activity prior to the ESP installation.  
b) Well treatment program including chemical treatment, flow, and frequency.  
c) Production and operating data for the life of the ESP.  Also, higher resolution data, such as from VSD data downloads, for periods immediately prior to the ESP failure.   
d) Records for all surface systems to include service calls, repairs, or modifications.  
e) Operating procedures, practices, deviations, exceptions, or modifications . 
f) VSD, switchboard, and motor control device setup data and operation 
history . 

=== PAGE 18 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Note :  VSD data may need to be downloaded prior to lock -out/tag- out 
procedures for well intervention.  
g) Startup data . 
h) Previous failure reports, if any.  
i) Cable repair data such as splice locations, damage, cable electrical test 
results, etc.  
j) All supervisory control and data acquisition ( SCADA ), digital control system 
(DCS ), monitoring program information should be included, if available:  
1) Number of starts/stops . 
2) Total days of operation . 
3) System set point  or operating mode changes such as:  
− Control changes ( e.g., constant hertz, gas lock mode, PID control, 
etc.).  
4) Trend analysis of the following (as  available):  
i. Motor amps . 
ii. Motor temperature . 
iii. Pump intake pressure.  
iv. Pump intake temperature.   
v. Pump discharge pressure.  
vi. Tubing pressure . 
vii. Casing pressure.  
viii. Vibration . 
ix. Choke, back pressure valve, settings . 
x. ESP protection settings such as overload, underload, motor 
temp trip, etc.  
5) Calculations (history match) comparing well test data with sizing data to evaluate:   
i. Pump operating range throughout the production cycle and 
start/restart conditions.  Sizing should estimate total fluid production for est imated pump conditions.   
ii. Cable estimated fluid level, geologic gradient temperature, 
rate of pressure drop on restarts and POOH . 
 

=== PAGE 19 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 6.3 Sample Collections, Analysis and Preservation  
 
During an ESP pull samples may be collected such as oil from ESP 
components, s olids or debris from pump, scale on ESP housing, etc.  It is 
recommended that samples be collected,  and a chain of custody  be followed 
for the samples .  Analysis of the samples can be critical  to the determination of 
root cause.  
a) Third party analysis may be required.  Responsibility for the analysis should be clearly identified within the chain of custody. The chain of custody is 
typically:  
1) Identification and collection.   
2) Analysis.   
3) Storage.   
4) Preservation.   
5) Transportation.   
6) Presentation of findings . 
7) Return to owner.  
b) The chain of custody should include :  
1) Who obtained the evidence.   
2) Where and when the evidence was obtained.   
3) Who secured the evidence.  
4) Who had control or possession of the evidence during each of the 
sequential responsibilities .  
c) Label the sample with the following information:  
1) Company . 
2) Collection Date . 
3) Well name/number . 
4) Component from which sample was collected to include:  
i. Serial  number of the component .  
ii. Description of the component . 
d) Fluid samples  (all types)  should be collected in clear, clean containers  
protected from direct sunlight exposure after sample collection.  
1) Collect sufficient samples for testing as may be defined by the supplier, operator,  or laboratory.    
2) Identify the location where the fluid sample was taken.  
e) Solids samples should be collecte d in clear, clean plastic bags  protected 
from direct sunlight exposure after sample collection.  
1) Collect sufficient samples for testing as may be defined by the supplier, operator, or laboratory.  
2) Identify the location where the solids sample was taken.  
f) Larger samples may require to be tagged/labeled independently . 
g) Metallurgical evaluations:   

=== PAGE 20 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 1) Avoid disturbing the area to be evaluated.   
2) If the area to be evaluated includes a break, avoid allowing the two 
ends to be in contact.   
3) If the area of interest is believed to be some type of corrosion issue, avoid extensive cleaning.   
4) Inhibit  (e.g., rust inhibitor)  items to avoid further corrosion from rust.  
Seal the components as may be required; consult with the 
appropriate specialist  as needed.  
h) Pump  stages:  
1) It is generally best to provide the impeller and diffuser combined , 
which  are considered a “pump- stage” . 
2) Inhibit the stage to prevent rust.    
3) Place smaller broken pieces in a separate bags or plastic containers  
from the larger pieces to prevent further damage to the smaller 
pieces. Maintain the associated small and large piece collections  
together.  
i) Place ceramic components in separate containers to avoid further damage or breakage.   
j) Place the mechanical shaft seals in a clear plastic bag identifying the location.  Protect the ceramic components by sealing separately, as may be required.  
k) Place the elastomer  (O-rings, seal/protector bags, etc.)  in a sealed 
container  to avoid exposure to atmospheric conditions.  
 
6.4 Recommended Tooling  
 
The following outlines a list of tooling considered necessary for effective 
teardown of ESP components for failure analysis : 
a) Tooling to dismantle  each component.  The detailed tooling list is supplier 
specific.  

=== PAGE 21 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 b) Reference drawings with dimensions.  
c) Assembly procedure .  
d) Magnifying glasses .  
e) Calip ers to measure components from pumps, protectors/seals , motors . 
f) Depth gauges , such as d rop gauge.   
g) Pick set . 
h) Magnet . 
i) Flashlight . 
j) Permanent markers . 
k) Paint markers . 
l) Rulers, measuring tapes . 
m) Sealable s ample bags .  
n) Tags with wire attachment and felt tip markers . 
o) Sample containers (plastic, wood crate, or ship with ESP component box ). 
p) Camera .  
q) Microscope . 
r) Pressure tester for motor housing.  
s) Access to x- ray gun, material identification device.  
t) Electrical meters to measure phase to phase and phase to ground . 
u) Megger (1000 volt minimum, 2500 volt preferred) . 
v)  Saws sufficient to cut housings, stators . 
w) Labeling device.  
 
7 Equipment Dismantle and Inspection   
 
7.1 General  
 
 
This section has the recommended practices for dismantling /teardown of each 
component in an ESP.  The condition of each used component  should be 
thoroughly documented.  When possible, the condition should be compared to its original state.  Evaluation and observation of the appearance of the 
component includes : 

=== PAGE 22 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 a) Mechanical damage.  
b) Corrosion.  
c) Erosion.  
d) Indication of excessive temperature.  
 
A thorough description should be provided with a complete photo gallery  
showing the state of the used equipment.   Areas of interest should be 
highlighted for ease of evaluation and discussion.   If certain components will 
not be dismantled, note that it was not evaluated along with the reason for not 
evaluating.   
If at any point during the dismantle, a condition rev eals the need to adapt and/or 
stop the dismantle, then document the condition and adjust the process  
accordingly.  
All component s inspected should include the following:  
e) Record and confirm serial numbers as per the installation and pull 
reports . 
f) Inspect the exterior condition of the housing.  Typical observations 
include:  
1) Physical damage .  
i. Erosion.  
ii. Corrosion.  
iii. Scraping . 
iv. Gouges . 
v. Indications of vibration during operation.   
2) Inspect the housing for straightness . A visual inspection on a dolly is 
considered acceptable  with photo documentation.  Rotate the pump 
on flat floor and observe for straightness (commonly referred to as a Flop Test).  
3) Inspect the housing for indications of excessive heat . 
g) Inspect any coatings for damage such as flaking, scrap ing or corrosion 
damage.  
 
7.2 Pump , Gas Separator, Intake 
7.2.1  Pumps and Gas Handlers  
 
The information below provides general guidance on failure analysis for pumps and gas handlers.  (Reference Figure 1)  
a) Remove the head and base shipping caps. Specific instructions should be 
given to return the discharge head with the pump. Do not
 permit the 
discharge head to remain at the wellsite with the handling joint.   

=== PAGE 23 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 1) Inspect the head  and base inner diameter condition .  
2) Check  the base O -ring boss and disc harge thread connection for 
damage as applicable. Take material samples as necessary.  
3) Observe the condition of the O -ring(s).  Do not permit O -rings to be 
discarded at the wellsite.  Instruct the technicians to keep t he original 
O-rings intact and un distur bed.   
4) Note any damage to the flanges and associated mating joints.  
b) Inspect the coupling (if applicable) and spline conditions.  
1) Give particular attention to the flange splines to note any  installation 
damage.  
2) If the coupling is a two- piece coupling, inspect the retaining pins  for 
proper setting and remaining intact.  
c) Inspect the shaft for the following:  
1) Shaft settings . 
i. Note shaft settings as compared to manufacturer’s allowable 
tolerances.   
ii. Confirm if shaft settings are within tolerance.  
iii. If possible, compare the shaft setting measurements to the 
readings documented from assembly.  
2) Shaft rotation.  
3) Axial play . 
4) Side play . 
5) Shaft wear, relative to stage position.  
6) Damage that indicates the shaft is twisted . 
d) Use a shaft rotation tool on the opposite end, or another visual confirmation 
device, to determine if the shaft is intact or broken within the pump. If the shaft is confirmed broken, check shaft rotation from either end.  
e) Remove the head, top bearing (if appli cable) and base and inspect the O -
ring conditions . 
f) Remove and inspect the compression tube which  is defined as the 
component that compresses the diffusers  to prevent spinning within 
housing.   
g) Inspect the head and base bearing bushing inner diameter condit ion 
parameters below. If wear is observed, measure the diameter, and compare 
to manufacturing specifications.  
1) Radial wear . 
2) Sharp edges that may indicate abrasive wear . 
3) One-sided wear.  
h) Inspect the shaft at the locations of the head and base bushings  as given 
below .  If wear is observed, measure the diameter, and compare to 
manufacturing specifications.  

=== PAGE 24 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 1) Radial wear . 
2) One-side wear . 
i) Give attention to all bearing systems (if in the assembly)  for displacement 
or damage.  
j) Inspect all items used to assemble the pump, including:  (Note:  this will vary 
between pump types).   
1) Two-piece ring(s) . 
2) Snap /retaining rings . 
3) Locking rings . 
k) Remove the pump stack from the pump housing and inspect the external 
diffuser and diffuser O -ring conditions. Typical observations include:  
1) Discoloration . 
2) Conditions of O -rings . 
i. Hardened from excessive temperature.  
ii. Swollen . 
iii. Other . 
3) Confirm location of O -rings is per manufacturing procedure  
4) Condition of the diffusers:  
i. Evidence that the diffuser has spun (rotated) in against the 
housing.  
ii. Evidence of scoring on the diffuser OD.  
iii. Dimple or collapsed.  
iv. Other damage . 
Note :  in some cases,  it may not be possible to remove the stack from housing 
so other measures may be needed to be able to examine stages.   
 l) Number the stages  (diffusers)  from bottom to top . 
m) Remove the stages from the shaft. Inspect  the shaft and key condition , 
including:  
1) Wear or twist to the shaft keyway and  key-stock.  
2) Wear to the shaft , in p articular the bearing locations.  
n) Inspect the pump stages.  At a minimum inspect stages at the head, base,  
and midpoint.  Typically,  2-3 stages should be inspected at each location.  
The number and location of stages being inspected may be adjusted,  as 
necessary.  
1) As applicable, inspect the bearing conditions :  
i. Note the type of bearing material at each stage/location.  
ii. Inspect the wear surfaces  condition.  
iii. Unusual wear, cracks, chips, etc. 
iv. Heat checking.  

=== PAGE 25 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 2) Inspect the impeller thrust washers’  condition (Note:  types of thrust 
washers will vary between pump types) . 
i. Upthrust . 
ii. Downthrust . 
3) Inspect flow passages/impeller vane condition.  
i. Plugging from debris and sol ids. 
ii. Erosion wear . 
iii. Mechanical damage.  
4) Inspect the diffuser inner diameter and vanes.  
5) Inspect impeller and diffuser wear  surfaces (hub, skirt,  and balance 
rings).  
6) Inspect the diffuser nesting surfaces for wear to include indications 
of spinning diffuser.  
7) Inspect the keyed components along the shaft . 
8) For detailed analysis, wear surfaces should be measured and compared to manufacturing specifications.  These measurements will allow the wear patterns to be further analyzed.   
o) Take samples as applicable.  

=== PAGE 26 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
Figure 1- Centrifugal Pump (typical)  


=== PAGE 27 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
7.2.2  Intakes and Gas Separators  
 
The information below provides general guidance on failure analysis for intakes and gas separators.  (Reference Figure 2)  
 
a) Remove the head and base shipping caps.  Inspect the head  and base inner 
diameter condition.  Note any plugging or presence of material or debris.  
b) Inspect the shaft for the following:  
1) Shaft settings:  
i. Note shaft settings as compared to manufacturer’s allowable 
tolerances.   
ii. Confirm if shaft settings are within tolerance.  
iii. If possible, compare shaft setting measurements to the readings documented during assembly.  
2) Shaft rotation.  
3) Axial play . 
4) Side play . 
5) Damage that indicates the shaft is twisted . 
c) Use a shaft rotation tool on the opposite end, or another visual confirmation 
device, to determine if the shaft is intact or broken within the pump. If the shaft is confirmed broken, check shaft rotation from either end.  
d) Inspect the screen and/or intake ports  for evidence of wear / plugging .  
Inspect the discharge ports  for same . 
e) Remove the head and base.  Inspect the O -rings as applicable.   
f) Inspect the inducer / auger / paddles condition, including:    
Note : components and locations vary based upon type .   
1) Erosional wear . 
2) Mechanical damage.  
g) Remove the components from the shaft  and observe:   
1) Condition of snap/retainer  rings.  
2) Condition of any spacers . 
3) Conditions of any two -piece rings or retaining devices . 
4)  Inspect ion of the hardened liner.  
h) Inspect the shaft and key condition, noting:  
1) Wear or twist to the shaft keyway or key- stock . 
2) Wear to the shaft . 
3) Damage from a broken or damaged bearing system s. 
i) As applicable, inspect the bearing condition:  
1) Note the bearing material(s) . 
2) Wear surfaces condition.  

=== PAGE 28 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 3) Unusual wear, cracks, chips, etc.  
4) Heat checking . 
j) Take samples as applicable, placing in documented sample container for 
later evaluation.  

=== PAGE 29 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
Figure 2 - Gas Separator (typical)  


=== PAGE 30 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 7.3 Seal/Protector  
 
The purpose of the seal / protector teardown is to determine if this ESP component performed per design and application.  Therefore, it is important to determine mechanical condition and the path of well fluid entry for each section and the amount of well fluid contamination within each section.   Be sure to 
perform pressure check on the completed tandem seal(s)/protector(s) assembly prior to separation of the configuration.  
 
There is significant debate regarding taking fluid samples from the seals/protectors at the wellsite versus leaving all plugs intact for inspection at the teardown facility. This decision to take fluid samples should be made by prior agreement of operator, service company and rig operator as part of standard pull procedures or case- by-
case.  Considerations are briefly outlined below:  
− Collec ting samples at the time of the pulling of the ESP is the most 
representative of conditions during the operation of the system.  However, samples can be misplaced or improperly identified.   
− Removing plugs at the wellsite may contaminate evidence that woul d 
otherwise be useful.   
− Failure to take fluid samples at the wellsite will allow the internal fluids to mix as the system is laid in the horizontal position for transportation.  
− There should be agreement between the operator and supplier on whether to retr ieve fluid samples at the wellsite.  
 General comments:  
a) Seals/protectors will vary from manufacturer to manufacturer.  It is 
recommended that the operation and design be reviewed prior to the teardown.  
b) Typical chambers are termed as “series” or “parallel”.  The function 
of these chambers will impact overall performance.  
c) Determine the path of well fluid entry for each chamber and the amount of contamination within each chamber.  
d) Lay out the components of the seal/protector in the order of 
disassembly from head  to base.  To avoid confusion do not  intermix 
the parts . 
e) Pressure check the tandem  seal(s)/protector(s) assembly and then 
component sections at approximately 10-15 psi (70-105 kPa) and 
check for leaks at all joints, vent plugs and drain and fill valves  using 
a leak detection solution.   
f) Take a sample of the fluid from each chamber as the seal / protector 
is dismantled  arranging the samples in order from the head to the 

=== PAGE 31 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 base.  If samples have been collected from the wellsite, arrange the 
samples in the same order for comparison.   
g) Allow sufficient time for the samples to settle, typically 10 -30 min.  
Inspect for debris  and well fluid.  If available, a sample of new oil ca n 
be used for comparison.  P hotograph samples after they have settled.     
h) If appropriate,  conduct a dielectric breakdown voltage test of the oil  
to compare  this value  to measurements obtained during final 
assembly and test. The dielectric test is consider ed optional  and 
should be done if there is prior agreement of operator and service company for the test.  
i) Remove the head shipping cap and visually inspect the shaft seal and shaft splines  and note any solids, abrasives, asphaltenes  or 
other material present.  Collect samples as necessary throughout the 
teardown process.   
Note :  It is normal for debris/contamination to be present at the head of the 
seal/protector that connects to the intake  and is exposed to well fluid.  
j) Check shaft rotation, axial movement,  and side play of the shaft.   
1) Check axial movement and shaft setting in the full up 
and full  down positions and compare to the manufacturer’s  
specifications , noting any deviations .   
2) Side play is subjective but should be adequately 
described in the report.   
k) Pressure test the mechanical shaft seal to approximately  10 psi ( 70 
kPa).  The test fixture will likely vary between manufacturers.  The 
inspector should be knowledge able with operation of the test fixture.  
Inspect the mechanical shaft seal for leaks.  If possible, rotate the shaft during the test.  It is acceptable  for a few bubbles to form initially.  
The inspection should evaluate for a continuous leak path.  
l) Manufacturer’s capabilities to pressure test mechanical shaft seals 
will vary.  And it may not be necessary to pressure test each 
mechanical shaft seal during the teardown.  However, it is considered necessary to pressure test mechanical seals for an effective teardown.   
m) Remove the mechanical shaft seal at the  head and v isually inspect 
the shaft seal and all associated components for damage.  
1) It is recommended to have a new mechanical shaft seal 
available for comparison.  
2) Remove the head of the seal/protector  and i nspect the 
O-ring(s) at the head to the  housing joint.   
n) Radial Support Bearings . 
1) Note the bearing material(s) . 

=== PAGE 32 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 2) Inspect the wear surfaces condition  
3) Unusual wear, cracks, ships, etc.  
4) Heat checking.  
o) Continue to tear  down the seal/protector inspecting each chamber 
and its associated components  and documenting damage,  includ ing: 
1) Bag Chamber:  
i. Confirm elastomer type and compare to original 
specification . 
ii. Inspect the bag for:  
− Heat damage (hardened, set) . 
− Chemical attack . 
− Blistering (gas bubbles that may be impregnated to the bag) . 
− Tears along the seam . 
− Tears at the bag clamp area.  
− Condition of the clamp.  
− Swelling . 
− Contamination inside the bag.   
iii. If the bag is intact, pressure test the bag and bag frame 
assembly to 5 psi / 35 kPa / and document any  leaks.  
2) Labyrinth Chamber:   
i. Identify any fluid interface marking (oil/water contact)  
ii. Confirm integrity of up/down tubes or shaft tubes . 
3) Metal Bellows Chambers:  General inspection and 
pressure test . 
4) Check Valves (if used ). 
i. Pressure t est the check valves for opening and closing 
pressures and compare to manufacturer’s specification , 
noting any differences . 
ii. Inspect the valve for debris contamination.  
5) Thrust Bearing Chamber:  
i. Confirm that the thrust runner was still keyed to the 
shaft.  
ii. Inspect the thrust bearing and runner . 
− Indications of direct contact (loss of lubricity  or 
overloaded) . 
Note : Loss of lubricity will typically lead to significant damage to the thrust bearing 
and runner.  
iii. Indications of superficial or significant scratches, scoring, smearing, debris imbedded into the pads . 
iv. Indications of the system running with gas present . 

=== PAGE 33 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 p) If equipped, inspect the filter screen for damage and collected 
contaminates.  
q) Other observations.   
i. Inspect the shaft and running areas for damage from one-sided wear or abrasive damage.   
 
7.4 Motor 
 
7.4.1  General  
 
This section provides  recommendations for inspection of  induction and permanent 
magnet motors.  Special considerations shall be taken for assessing permanent  
magnet motors especially with regards to electrical testing and the handling of the rotors .  For example, s pecial tooling will be required to teardown permanent 
magnet motors  which  varies between manufacturers.  The inspector should be 
familiar with the specific manufacturer’s process prior to commencing the teardown.  
Follow the manufacturer’s guidelines for completing the electrical tests.   
(Reference Figure 3) . 
 
7.4.2  Pre-Teardown Inspections  
 
7.4.2.1  Leak Test  
 
The steps below detail pressure testing a motor.  
 
a) It is recommended that the MLE/pothead remain connected to the motor at the wellsite (do not remove).    
1) The MLE should be cut approximately 60 cm / 24 in from the back of the pothead.  If the MLE/pothead was detached at the wellsite, the pressure test is considered compromised at this location.  However, the MLE/pothead should remain with the motor for inspection during the teardown.    
b) Pressure test the motor with the MLE/Pothead attached to approximately 
70 kPa / 10 psi  or to the manufacturer’s r ecommended pressure. Apply a 
leak detection solution and inspect the motor for leaks at the following locations:  
1) Pothead . 
2) Joints and connection points . 
3) Drain and fill valve locations . 
7.4.2.2  Electrical Testing  
 
The steps below detail electrical testing of a motor.  

=== PAGE 34 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
a) Prepare the ends of the MLE/Pothead for electrical testing  to test the 
motor with MLE/Pothead.  
b) Complete and record standard electrical tests .  The order of the tests may 
vary depending upon observations and conditions .  Compare the 
measured values  to the manufacturer’s tolerances and to the factory 
acceptance testing record:  
 
1) Phase to phase conductive resistance readings should be balanced 
within ±3%.  
2) Phase to ground insulation resistance testing:  
i. Using  a minimum of a 1000- V megger; conduct the 
insulation resistance test  for approximately 1 minute .  The 
duration of the test should be consistent.  Pay attention to the 
polarity to avoid damaging the downhole sensor.  
ii. If a low reading is observed, conduct the tests on the 
remainin g two phases.  
c) If motor tests good electrically, then connect the gauge/sensor surface readout, or run- in-hole (RIH) panel to verify gauge integrity.   
d) Remove the pothead and repeat the  electrical testing at the motor pothead 
testing the motor only . 
e) Inspect the pothead as follows:  
1) Damage to the pothead O -ring, boot, or other.  
2) Indications of water ingress or leak paths.  
3) Damage to the connectors , including any si gns of electrical burn.  
4) Retain the pothead/MLE for further evaluation, if required.  
Note : Insulation Resistance Testing  
− Low insulation resistance readings may indicate that the stator has been 
contaminated with well fluids.   
− A zero (0) or unbalanced reading indicates that the stator may have an 
electrical burn or is extremely contaminated with well fluid.   
− A reading that increases after the pothead is removed indicates a potential problem in the pothead.   
 
7.4.2.3  I-Block, Shaft and Oil Samples  
 
The steps b elow detail inspections of the motor I -block  and shaft, including oil 
samples.  If oil samples are collected, the samples should be tested per ASTM 
D877 or  ASTM D1533.  
 
a) Check the shaft extension and record the reading.  
b) Inspect the head bore O -ring surface for leak tracks, burrs, corrosion, or 
any other abnormal condition.  

=== PAGE 35 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 c) Inspect the coupling for damage to the splines .  
d) Inspect the shaft spline for damage, twisting, breaks, etc.  
e) Use a shaft spline tool , rotate the shaft,  and record how it rotates.   
f) Confirm the shaft rotates at both ends.   
g) Remove the drain- fill valves at the top and bottom of the motor and 
inspect for leakage  or damage.   
1) Inspect the lead gaskets for proper compression.   
2) Inspect O -rings for damage.   
3) Collect oil samples at the time of removal of the drain and fill 
valves.  
h) Remove the vent plug from the drain- fill valve and inspect  for leakage and 
proper compression on the lead gasket.  
i) Visually inspect the pothead for any damage prior to removal .  After the 
pothead has been removed make note of :  
1) any physical damage . 
2) external electrical damage.   
3) evidence of extreme heat, etc.  
j) Retain the pothead for further analysis if there are any signs of failure or damage.   
Note:  Analysis of the MLE/Pothead may be conducted separately.   
k) Inspect the I -block  and its surrounding components prior  to and after 
removal .  Observe closely for any indications of:  
1) Well fluid entry from a leaking pothead or seal . 
2) Indications of heat . 
3) Indications of electrical failure.  
4) Indications of mechanical failure.  
5) Indications of corrosion.   
l) As the base shipping cap is removed:   
1) Collect  a sample of the oil that drains from the motor .   
2) Observe closely for water droplets or other contamination such as brass or metal debris.   
3) Retain the sample for further evaluation as required.    
 
7.4.3  Removing the Head and the Base  
 The steps below details observations when removing the head and base from the motor.   
 
a) At the motor head:   
1) Examin ation of the thrust bearing pads for scratches, scoring, 
embedded particles, smearing, pitting or any other damage.   
2) inspect the motor thrust bearing, thrust runner and key for any signs of damage.  

=== PAGE 36 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 b) Inspect  the bottom of the thrust bearing cavity to see if the anti -rotation 
pins are intact.  
c) Inspect  the bushing (s) in the motor head for  damage  by checking for : 
1) Radial wear . 
2) One-side wear.  
3) Confirmat ion the bushing is intact  
4) As necessary, measure the ID of the bushing and compare to the 
manufacturer’s specification.    
5) Inspect the shaft in the bushing area.  As necessary, measure the OD of the shaft and compare to the manufacturer’s specification.  
d) Remo ve the motor head and i nspect  the threads for galling or other 
damage. Inspect the O -ring.  
e) Inspect the leads from the stator  checking for : 
1) Electrical burn . 
2) Length of leads . 
3) Physical damage to the leads that may have occurred during operation.  
4) Damage from excessive temperature .  
5) Any other physical or incidental damage.   
f) Observe any fluids that may be draining from the stator  such as water 
droplets or other debris.  Collect an additional sample if necessary.  
g) Remove the motor base and i nspect the O -ring. 
h) Inspect the motor base O -ring groove, base bushing and any/all adapter 
connection points.   
7.4.4  Rotor Stack Inspection  
 The steps below details observations for the rotors (rotor stack) . 
 
a) Pull the rotor stack from the stator  and note any difficulties removing the 
rotor stack.  Typical observations include:  
1) Check the spacing between the rotors and rotor bearings . 
2) Confirm the rotation of the rotor bearings . 
3) Check the anti -rotation device for heat or physical damage:  
i. Locking keys which may be stationary,  or spring loaded . 
ii. T-rings . 
iii. Others .  
4) Spinning rotor bearings .  
5) Damage to the rotor from rubbing against the stator (rotor strike) , 
including any indication of an electrical burn/arc.  
6) Damage between the rotor and rotor bearing.  
b) Number the rotors from bottom to top. 
c) Remove the rotors and rotor bearings from the shaft , then i nspect the rotor 
bearing assemblies :   

=== PAGE 37 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 1) For hollow shaft motor systems, check rotor bearing sleeve.  
alignment to the holes on the motor shaft .  
2) Wear between the rotor bearing sleeve and the shaft . 
3) Indications of heat/temperature effects . 
4) Inspect the rotor bearing thrust washers for mechanical damage 
and heat/temperature.  
5) Other physical damage.   
6) Measure the ID of the rotor bearing sleeves, as may be required.  
 
7.4.5  Motor Shaft  
 Complete a general visual inspection of the motor shaft  checking for : 
a) Spline area damage.  
b) Obvious signs of wear at the rotor bearing locations . 
c) Head/base bushing area wear . 
1) Observe for shaft wear . 
2) Observe for transfer of material from the head and 
base bushings . 
i. Brass . 
ii. Other . 
d) Plugging of holes in the shaft (if a hollow shaft) . 
e) Indications of heat . 
f) Inspection of the snap ring groove areas for damage.  
g) Inspection of the two -piece ring groove area for damage.  
h) Inspection of the keyway for damage.  
i) If the shaft has parted , protect the fracture areas to avoid further 
damage or contamination.   
 
7.4.6  Stator Inspection  
 The steps below details observations of the motor stator.  
 
a) After the rotor stack has been removed, visually inspect the head and base end coils.   
Note :  End coil inspection is generally not possible for encapsulated stators.  
b) Inspect the stator bore for any indications of damage, using  a borescope, 
if available.   
c) Inspect the laminations snap ring for movement or displacement.  
d) Repeat the electrical tests, as  necessary  and described above in Electrical 
Testing section . 
  

=== PAGE 38 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
7.4.7  Stator Dissection  
 
Stator dissection is normally not required.  Ho wever, there are instances where 
an electrical fault in the stator cannot be identified clearly  unless the stator is 
dissected . It is acceptable to transport the stator to another facility for dissecting  
if there is not availability of a saw capable  to cut the stator .  Carefully follow the 
manufacturer’s procedures and guidelines when cutting the stator as the 
lamination stack is under significant compression.   Procedures and guidelines 
will vary between manufactur ers.   
 
a) Complete electrical tests to identify the phase of the burn.  Typically, a 
burn inside the stator will only occur on one phase, although i t is possible 
for multiple phases to have electrical faults.  
b) Inspect the stator bore for any visible signs of an electrical burn  with a 
borescope, if available.  It may be possible to identify areas from associated rotor locations.  
c) If an area of possible failure is identified, measure and mark the exterior of the stator to avoid cutting through the failed/burned area.   
d) Always mark the stator head and base prior to each dissecting cut.   
e) Complete electrical tests to help isolate fault locations after each 
dissection step.  
f) After the fault area has been successfully isolated, carefully remove the laminations and mot or windings to avoid further damage to the electrical 
burn area.  

=== PAGE 39 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
Figure 3 - Center Tandem Motor (typical) 


=== PAGE 40 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
7.5 Downhole Gauge / Sensor  
 
This section gives general recommendations for inspection of downhole gauges /sensors.  Gauges/sensors can vary significantly between manufacturers  
and are often provided by third party suppliers.  The inspector should be familiar 
with the specific manufacturer’s process prior to commencing the inspection of the gauge/sensor . Removing the ga uge at the wellsite will void the sensor to 
motor connection pressure test.  
 
a) The gauge/sensor should remain connected to the motor prior to inspection.  
Note:  If the gauge is removed at the wellsite, detailed pictures and data should 
be collected as per t he recommendations below.   
b) The gauge/sensor connection to the motor should be pressure tested at the time of motor inspection.   
c) Visually inspect the gauge and all ports.  
d) Disconnect the gauge from the motor .   
e) Closely inspect  the connections wires, connectors,  and cavity area  and: 
1) Inspect the integrity of the wires . 
2) Inspect the connectors from the gauge into the motor.  
3) Inspect the connections for any indications of heat . 
4) Inspect the connections for any mechanical damage.  
5) Inspect the area for indications of well fluid being present.  
6) Inspect the O -ring. 
f) Follow the manufacturer’s guidelines for testing the gauge/sensor:  
1) Complete electrical integrity testing of the gauge/sensor . 
2) Connect the surface readout or  run-in-hole (RIH) panel  to verify gauge 
integrity.  Tests should include, but may not be limited to:  
i. Temperature . 
ii. Pressure .  
iii. Vibration . 
g) In some cases, it may be necessary to return the gauge/sensor to manufacturer facility  to perform a proper inspection.   
 
7.6 Cable and Splices  
 This section provides guidance on teardown for the main power cable (referred to as cable), cable splice(s), motor lead extension (MLE) and pothead.  These items will vary significantly between manufac turers.  The inspector should be familiar 
with the specific manufacturer’s process and design prior to commencing the inspection of these items and have ready  access to the specific procedures during 
the inspection and failure analysis process.  
 

=== PAGE 41 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 The follow ing recommended observations and data shall  be recorded when 
dismantling the cable string such as power cable, MLE cable, cable splices and 
pothead  though often is only a partial  section of the cable string sent for 
inspection.  
 Note :  The cable string is normally inspected in cable shop separately from the 
pump section so that the cable can quickly be re- run if possible.   
 
a) Confirm the cable construction along with serial number from pull report.  
b) Confirm the original dimensions of the cable . 
c) Confirm the electrical condition of the cable before and during pulling.  
1) It is recommended that photographs be collected of any unusual or damaged areas during the pull.  These areas should be clearly identified.  
2) The electrical test using  a minimum of  a 5000 -V megger; conduct the 
insulation resistance  test for approximately 1 minute and should 
include the following:  
i. Electrical test prior to disconnecting the lower pigtail (if used) . 
ii. Electrical test after removal of the lower pigtail (if used) . 
d) At the manufacturer’s facility, r ecord the electrical condition of the power 
cable with the MLE cable.   
e) If the cable is faulted, inspection may include the following:  
1) Spool the cable on to an empty reel and inspect the cable for visual damage.  Observations s hould include:  
i. Mechanical damage from impact in the wellbore including 
orientation of damage to determine if occurred on install or on pull.   
ii. Mechanical damage from the application of clamps or bands . 
iii. Electrical faulting.  
2) Use a time domain  reflectivity meter (TDR) to identify the general 
area of the fault.   
Note :  Many facilities will not have access to a TDR.  
3) Conduct a thump test (high voltage DC test) per the manufacturer’s guidelines.   
Note :  Repeated use of this option may cause cable damage.    
f) As areas of concern are observed, v isually inspect the cable.  Identify the 
location of the damage relative to the wellbore depth.  Retain samples as 

=== PAGE 42 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 required for future evaluation (if needed).  General observations should 
include:  
1) Gas blowout . 
2) Damage to the insulating system . 
3) Damage to the barrier system  to identify obvious or potential 
locations containing electrical failures, mechanical damage (such as 
gas migration) , etc.  
4) Compare the used cable to new cable if  new cable is available . 
g) Evaluat e the following:   
1) Armor: drag marks, compression marks, dents, corrosion, other damage.  
2) Barrier tapes, braid, lead sheath: embrittlement, pitting, breach, split, evidence of excessive temperature, other damage.  
3) Electrical insulation: swelling, embrittlem ent, splits, discolored, 
contamination, nicks, evidence of excessive temperature, etc.  
4) Conductor: burn, discolored, exposure to well fluids, evidence of excessive temperature, etc.  
h) If a cable splice failure is identified or suspected, cut the cable 
approxi mately six feet ( two meters) on either side of the splice.  Avoid 
cutting into the splice.   
i) Deconstruct the splice in the reverse order of construction.  Key 
observations of a splice include:  
1) Overall size of the splice.  
2) Mechanical damage of the splice . 
3) Identify primary burn and secondary burn, if possible.  
4) Confirm layers of splice are as specified.  
i. High modulus tape.  
ii. High temp tape.  
iii. Lead.  
iv. Other layers as prescribed by the manufacturer’s  procedure.  
v. Confirm that the layers have proper overlap as per the manufacturer’s specification . 
5) Review and observe the insulation at the connection points.  General observations  include:  
i. Heat related damage.  

=== PAGE 43 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 ii. Mechanical damage.  
iii. Confirmation of the assembly process to include.  
− Proper preparation of the insulation and conductor . 
− Confirmation that the nicopress sleeve was properly 
prepared and applied.  
− Other . 
6) Collect and label samples as necessary.  
 
7.7 Pothead  
 
Potheads will vary significantly between manufacturers.  In addition, each 
manufacturer may have varying types of potheads.  The inspector should be 
familiar with the specific manufacturer’s process and design prior to commencing the inspection of the pothead  and have ready  access to the 
specific  procedures and drawings during the inspection and failure analysis 
process.    
a) Perform a visual inspection of the pothead noting any damage  or fluid 
leaking from or around the pothead.  
b) Observation of the p hysical condition of the pothead should include:  
1) Any indications  of mechanical damage.  
2) Any indications  of excessive temperatures . 
3) Extrusion of elastomer on the face of the pothead.  
4) Loss of epoxy (if any) at the back of the pothead.  
c) Complete both a positive and negative pressure test of the pothead.   
d) Complete insulation resistance tests and record the readings  using  a 
minimum of a 1000- V megger; conduct the test for approximately 1 minute.   
e) If feasible, use  an X-Ray or Gamma- Ray unit to detect internal damages 
before dissecting  the pothead.  
f) If required,  dissect the pothead to assess the condition of the internal 
components  including:  
1) Swelling . 
2) Shear . 
3) Burn . 
4) Embrittlement . 
5) Voids . 
6) Displaced components . 

=== PAGE 44 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 7) Others . 
 
8 Report  
 
The failure analysis report contains the information detailing the results of the 
failure analysis.  There are multiple methods available to determine root cause. 
The “ why” analysis is an effective method to determine root cause for ESP’s .  The 
“why” process starts wi th a list of possible reasons the system could have failed. 
Thereafter, continually ask the question “ why?” during the teardown process  to 
identify symptoms as well as the root cause.  T he failure analysis determines what 
event, component or process that c aused the system not to function as it was 
intended.  Statements should be as specific as possible.  Generic  statements such 
as “well- bore conditions” should be avoided in root cause statements.   
The following outlines the necessary information to  be inclu ded in the report.  It is 
recommended that as much information as possible be included, although in some cases, some information may not be available.  It is strongly recommended that 
the root cause be clearly stated at  the beginning of the report.  The remainder of 
the report provides details and supporting evidence.   
 Note :  In some cases, root cause may be undetermined.  
 
a) Root cause statement for the system failure.   
b) Equipment descriptions & details . 
c) Installation information with photographs . 
d) Pull information with photographs . 
e) Production information .  
f) Factory acceptance testing (FAT) documentation.  
g) Post failure  analysis from any third parties , when applicable.   
1) Metallurgical . 
2) Chemical . 
3) Other . 
h) Equipment sizing data (design data)  as it relates to the choice of equipment.  
Also, relating to production information at different points in the life of the ESP.   
i) VSD data download.   
j) SCADA or monitoring information.   
k) Photographs from the equipment teardown with captions and detail . 

=== PAGE 45 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 l) Recomm endations & corrective actions . 
  

=== PAGE 46 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Annex A  
(Informative)  
Commonly Used Terms , Definitions  and Abbreviations  
 
Adaptors  A general description of devices that adapt/fit different components for 
connection . 
AGH  An enhanced method (stage type) to handle gas in a centrifugal pump . 
Anti-Rotation 
Clip The item that prevents the rotor bearing from spinning in the stator bore.  
Anti-Swirl Ribs  The process of creating a method whereby erosion is limited in the diffuser.  
Stage specific.  Also referred to as break water, sand dams.  
Auto-Diverter 
Valve (ADV)  A valve that is pressure operated and designed to open when the ESP is not 
operating.  A method to minimize sand falling back from the tubing into the 
pump . 
Axial Flow  Impeller and diffuser flow passages are in the axial direction.  This stage type 
is seldom used in the ESP industry.  
Babbitt  A lead -type metal material (tin, lead, antimony, copper) used for the running 
surface on the pads of thrust bearings.   
Babbitt Bearing  A thrust bearing that where t he thrust bearing pads are a lead -type material.  
Balance Hole  Holes drilled between the impeller inlet region and the top of the upper shroud 
which reduces the thrust load on the stage.  Requires that the impeller have a 
balance ring and is typically used on mixed flow stages.  
Bearing 
Housing  The support structure for the abrasion resistant shaft bearings.  Used when 
the shaft bearings cannot be incorporated into the diffuser.  
Bearing 
Support  This cast structure consists of an inner and out er ring connected by radial 
spokes.  In the heads and bases of pumps this supports the shaft bearings.  
Sometimes called a wagon wheel.  
BHP Brake Horsepower . 
BHT Bottom Hole Temperature . 
BOM  Bill of Materials . 
Bottom Floater 
(BFL) The bottom 60 percent of the stages are "floater type" and the upper 40 
percent are "compression type."  The compression stages support the shaft 
axial load.  This type of construction is no longer common.  
BPD Barrels Per Day -unit of measure; one barrel=42 U.S. gallons . 
Break Water  A smooth radius in the bottom of the diffuser which directs the flow of fluids to 
the next stage.  
Break Water  The process of creating a method whereby erosion is limited in the diffuser.  
Stage specific.  Also referred to as sand dams, anti -swirl ribs.  
Brine  Salt water.  
Brush Cable  A cable made of many fine strands for flexibility.  Generally used as the leads 
that transition from the solid magnet wire used in the motor winding to the 
electrical connectors.  Sometimes called Brush Wire.  
Brush Cable  The cable that connects to the motor windings.  Also referred to as motor 
leads . 
Bushing 
Surface  The area of the shaft that rides inside a bushing.  

=== PAGE 47 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 By-Pass 
Tubing  The tubing that is adjacent to the ESP when a Y -tool assembly in install ed. 
CCP  Cross -Coupling Protectoliser . 
Centrifugal 
Gas Separator  A gas separator which uses centrifugal force to separate gas from well fluid.  
Many have features such as rotary, vortex and natural separation with 
combinations of these to accomplish diverting high density fluid to the pump, 
low-density fluid and vapor are returned to the annulus.  
Coil Forming 
Block  A mechanical support for the end -coils of a wound stator.  
Cookie Cutter  Slang for Motor Lead Guard Adapter, typically found i n CT and LT motors.  
D&F Drain and Fill Valve.  
DCS  Digital Control System (often interchanged with SCADA).  
Discharge 
Pressure Sub  The same as a discharge head but also has a method to port discharge 
pressure of the pump to the DMS.  
Draw Bench  A work bench fitted with a trough and draw works to facilitate assembly or 
dismantle of an ESP pumps and motors.  
EFT Electrical feed -through, ( may also be referred to as the upper pigtail ).  The 
EFT is a system that allows the power cable to transition from the annulus to 
surface while maintaining a pressure and gas tight barrier at the wellhead. 
Multiple configurations may comprise an EFT.  
End Flop  Stator inside diameter to housing thread concentricity.  
Enhanced 
Quality Plan  Refers to enhancements of a standard quality plan.  An enhanced quality plan 
(sometimes referred to as a "QCP") is typically manufacturer and project 
specific.  
EPDM  An insulating material often used on ESP cable.  EPDM=ethylene propylene 
diene monomer . 
ESP System 
Efficiency  The eff iciency for the entire ESP system (pump, seal/protector/intake/motor).  
Typically, does not include power cable loss, tubing friction loss or surface 
electrical equipment losses.  
Extruded 
Barrier  Refers to a method of cable manufacturing whereby an extrud ed barrier 
material is applied over the cable conductor insulation.  Generally found in the 
cable description.  
Eye Opening   The open area where fluid enters the impeller.  
FCE Flat cable extension, sometimes called the MLE – Motor Lead Extension.  
Field 
Attachable 
Connector  The field installed electrical connector that mates to the wellhead penetrator 
just below the tubing hanger.  The connector is typically installed on the power 
cable just prior to landing the tubing hanger in the well head.  
Flat Cable  Three flat, parallel conductors in an armored cable which give the smallest 
profile available.  
Flat Cable 
Extension 
(FCE) A special clearance parallel conductor cable used to go alongside the pump 
and protector /seal. The FCE is spliced to the main power cable .  May also be 
referred to as the motor flat; motor lead; flat cable.  The FCE will have the 
pothead incorporated on the lower end.  Also see MLE.  
Floater  The pump impellers are free to slide or “float, “on  the shaft.  All impeller thrust 
is carried on the impeller thrust washers.  All shaft thrust is carried by the seal 
/ protector thrust bearing.   
Flop The longitudinal curvature of the stator over its overall length; the amount of 
bow in a shaft.  
FLOP  A method used to inspect an ESP component for straightness (post -failure) . 

=== PAGE 48 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Go No Go  A gauge used to inspect part tolerances.  
Go-No Go 
Gauge  An inspection tool used to check a workpiece against its allowed tolerances 
via a go/no- go test. Its name is derived from two tests: the check involves the 
workpiece having to pass one test (go) and fail the other (no -go). 
GOR  Gas Oil Ratio.  
GRB  Gauge ready base, the lower end of the motor is configured to mate with a 
DMS.  
Ground Bed  The area in which the overall ESP system is grounded at surface . 
H2S Hydrogen Sulfide --poisonous and corrosive gas.  
Handling Error  Incorrect handling of the ESP system that could lead to damage.  Generally, 
includes shipping damage as well as damage that may be incurred at th e 
wellsite.  
High Load 
Thrust Bearing  Any type of thrust bearing with a higher capacity than the standard post and 
pad type bearing.  
High Strength 
Shaft  The base shaft material of the seal / protector, gas separator, intake and pump 
are typically K500 Monel or Nitronic 90 (manufacturer specific).  In some 
applications Inconel materials are substituted when higher strength shafts are 
required.  
HI Pot  Tester  An instrument used to test the integrity of the windings by introducing high 
voltage electrical potential to motor windings and cable and measure current 
leakage.  
HSS High strength shaft  
ID Internal Diameter.  
Inconel  Material generally used for high strength shafts (specific between 
manufacturers) . 
Infant Failure  An ESP failure that oc curs within a short period of time after the initial start -
up.  The period  can vary significantly between manufacturers and operators.  
Installation 
Error Describes damage that may be incurred to the ESP system while being 
installed.  
Installation 
Report  The document filled out by a field service technician that documents the 
installation of an ESP system.  Also see Pull and Run Report.  
Insulator   A Teflon, PEEK or other insulating sleeve that isolates an electrical terminal 
from the b ase or head in a motor.  
Integral Intake  Some high rate and large series pump integrate the intake and pump base into 
a single component.  
Kapton  An insulating material (Polyimide film) often used as the primary insulation on 
magnet wire.  Kapton is a trade name unique to Dupont manufactured 
polyimide film.  
Key Stock  The material used to attach the pump impeller to the shaft  
Key-Stop Located at the top of a floater pump, the key -stop keeps the key, which 
transmits the torque from the shaft and has a thrust washer between it and the 
bearing support of pump head.  
Lapping  A process used in the manufacture of thrust bearings and runners which uses 
a very fine abrasive to create a smooth and flat surface.  
Lapping  A method use d to provide a specific flatness.  Generally used with thrust 
bearings and thrust bearing runners.  
Lasalle Clamp  A cast -metal type protectoliser.  
Leads  Wires connected of each of the three phases windings that then jumper across 
to the connection terminal . 

=== PAGE 49 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Lock Weld  A weld at a joint that is intended to prevent decoupling or loosening of joint.  
Locking Rotor 
Bearing  A rotor bearing that cannot rotate or spin in the stator bore.  
Lock -Plate  A metal plate welded across a housing joint to prevent it from loosening in 
service.  
Lower Shroud  The portion of the impeller which forms the bottom of the flow passages.  
Micro  Micro -inch.  
Micro -Finish  The surface finish (sometimes referred to as "smoothness") . 
Middle Tandem  A pump section without an integral discharge head or intake.  The pump may 
be connected to an additional pump section, discharge head, an intake,  or a 
gas separator.  
Minor ID  The smallest inside diameter on the part.  
Minor OD  The smallest outside diamete r on the part.  
Modular Pump  A pump where pump stage thrust is carried in bearing systems within the pump 
staging.  Bearing spacing can vary.   
Motor Lead 
Guard Adapter  The component used to protect the motor leads.  Also referred to as a Cookie 
Cutter . 
Motor Leads  The cable that connects to the motor windings and transitions to the motor 
terminals.   Also referred to as brush cable.  
Motor Series  Motors are typically classified by "series" which is dependent on the housing 
Outside Diameter (OD) in inches.   375 series = 3.75" OD, and so on with 450, 
456, 562, 725 and 738 being the most common series.  
Mushroom 
Bearing or T -
Bearing  A component of bearing system for modular pumps, typically manufactured 
from a hardened abrasion resistant material.  
Ni-Resist  Nickel based alloy used in the manufacturing of pump parts and other related 
equipment.  Type 1 is the most common alloy used.  Type 4 is sometimes 
used for high profile abrasive installations . 
OD Outside Diameter.  
Operating Error  Operation of the ESP was incorrect.  The term is used to describe a wide 
variety of operating conditions.  
psi The groove that holds the O -ring in place.  
O-ring Groove  The area where an O -ring is placed . 
Pancake Stage  The same as a radial flow stage.  Slang for radial flow stage.  
Phase Barrier  An electrical insulating paper placed between the end -coils where they overlap 
to increase the phase x phase insulation value.  
Plug In 
Pothead  A pothead that plugs directly into the motor with the need to manually insulate 
the pothead x motor lead terminals.  
POD  Placing an ESP in a contained tube and referred to as a POD . 
Polyimide  Polyimide is a polymer of imide monomers belonging to the high class of high -
performance plastics.  Often interchanged with Kapton.  Most often use d for 
insulating material for the motor windings and motor lead extensions.   
pothole  Voids or bubbles in a casting, typically the impeller or diffuser.  
Pothole  The port in the motor head the pothead plugs into.  
Protectoliser  A device used to protect the ESP cable or motor lead extension from 
mechanical damage during RIH or POOH.  

=== PAGE 50 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Pull and Run 
Report  The document filled out by a field service technician that documents the 
installation or removal of an ESP system.  Also see Installation Report a nd 
Pull Report.  
Pump 
Efficiency  A measurement comparing power to produce to the power consumed by the 
pump.  Hydraulic HP delivered by the pump / Brake HP input into the pump.  
Pump 
Efficiency  The efficiency at which the pump is operating or the efficienc y for which the 
pump tested at the factory.  Sometimes confused with ESP systems efficiency.  
Pump Series  Pumps are typically classified by "series" which is dependent on the housing 
Outside Diameter (OD) in inches.  338 series = 3.38" OD, 380series = 3.80" 
OD, and so on with 338, 380, 400, 513, 538 562, 650, 675, 862, 950, 1000 
and 1125 being the most common series.  
Pump Series  Pumps are typically classified by "series" which is dependent on the housing 
Outside Diameter (OD) in inches.  375 series = 3.75" OD, 406 series = 4.06" 
OD, 450 series = 4.50"OD, and so on with 456, 540, 562, 725, 738 and 880 
being the most common series.  
Pump Stage 
Name or 
Description  The method in which a supplier identifies a pump.  Descriptions vary between 
manufacturers . 
RAD  Radius.  
Radial Flow  Flow passages in the impellers and diffusers are primarily in a direction radially 
outward from the shaft.  Fluid exiting radially from the impeller is quickly turned 
180 degrees and flows radially back toward the shaft and inlet of the next 
impeller.  
Radial Play  Describes the radial wear in a pump.   
rotor The electrical reading used to measure electrical insulation resistance for an 
ESP motor, cable, or overall ESP system.  Expressed in a value of Ohms, Meg 
Ohms or Gig Ohms.  
Rotary Gas 
Separator  A gas separator that uses paddles to assist with gas separation.  Generally 
compared to a vortex gas separator.  Generally used in higher viscosity fluid 
applications.  
Sand Dam  The process of creating a method whereby erosion is reduced in the diffuser.  
Stage specific.  Also referred to as break water, anti -swirl ribs.  
SandGuard  A device installed in the tubing above the ESP to minimize sand falling back 
from the tubing into the pump . 
Seal Surface  The area of a protector sha ft where the seal is located.  
Shedder  A device used on a shaft which is designed to swing any heavy objects in the 
well fluid outward, e.g., water, sand.  
Shimming  The process of spacing out shafts end settings such that thrust forces can be 
transferred to the next lower section of equipment.  Typically, used with 
compression construction pump to transfer the pump thrust onto the protector 
/ seal thrust bearing.  
Single (S) 
Motor  A motor with a head made to accept the power cable connection on  top and 
an integral "Y" connection at the bottom connecting the windings together.  
SIT String Integration Test.  
Skirt The portion of the lower shroud which projects down into the eye opening of 
the diffuser.  The skirt can function as a seal and/or a radial bearing, depending 
on the stage design.  
Sleeve  The rotating part that keys to the shaft and rotates in a mating stationary 
bushing.  

=== PAGE 51 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Slinger  A ring mounted on a shaft which throws the heavier particles and fluids 
outwards; shredded; sand slinger.  
Slinger  Describes a component that 'slings' fluid.  
Slot Liner  Insulating tube or sheet used to insulate the slots in the unwound stator; 
located between the magnet wire and the laminations.  
Smearing  Used to describe damage to a thrust bearing or runner . 
Spline  The section at the end of the shaft which is toothed to accept a matching 
coupling which then transmits torque from one shaft to the next equipment 
section shaft.  
Stage 
Balancing  The process of dynamically balancing the impeller of a pump stage.  Only 
applicable to higher rate mixed flow pump stages.  Not all pump stages are 
dynamically balanced.  Stage specific, supplier specific.  
Stamped 
Clamp  A clamp used to protect and attach the ESP cable to the tubing.   Also referred 
to as a Ca nnon Clamp . 
Standard 
Intake  The standard bolt -on intake provides intake holes and screens for center or 
upper tandem pump sections (which end with a simple male flange).  
Surface 
Switchgear  All components required to operate an ESP at the surface.  Gener ally, includes 
transformers, VSD/Switchboard, Junction Box . 
SWBD  Switchboard . 
Tape & Braid  Refers to a method of cable manufacturing whereby a tape like material and a 
braiding material are applied over the conductor insulation.  Generally found 
in the cable description.  
Tape In 
Pothead  A pothead that requires the taping (wrapping of electrical insulating tape) over 
the individual lead connectors when assembled at the wellsite.  
TDH Total Dynamic Head . 
THD Thread.  
Thrust 
Chamber  The area in a seal /protector of the thrust bearing system.  
Tilting Pad 
Thrust Bearing  A type of high load thrust bearing in which pads are mounted to freely pivot on 
a post.  
TIR Total Indicator Reading.  
Tool Mark 
Chatter  Damage to a finish when a manufacturing tool is moved or removed.  
Transformer  A device for converting one AC voltage to another with different root -mean -
square values, but same frequency.  
T-Rings  Another method for preventing rotor bearings from spinning in the stator bore.  
Type  4 Ni -
Resist  Describes a higher nickel content of ni -resist that is intended to enhance 
performance in abrasive environments.  Manufacturer specific.  
Up Tube  Generally used to describe a component in a seal/protector . 
Up-Thrust 
Washer  A washer used as the bearing surface on the top of the impeller.  This is 
generally phenolic filled fabric material;  however other materials are 
sometimes used.  
Varnished 
Stator  Generally used to describe a method of stabilizing, protecting, insulating th e 
motor windings.  The varnish material will vary between manufacturers . 
Voltage 
Optimization  The method to optimize the voltage of an ESP system based on actual motor 
load rather than rated motor load capacity.  Voltage optimization generally 
improves mo tor efficiency and lowers motor operating temperature.  

=== PAGE 52 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Vortex Gas 
Separator  A gas separator that creates a vortex to assist with gas separation.  Generally 
compared to a rotary gas separator.  
Wagon Wheel  This cast structure consists of an inner and outer ring connected by radial 
spokes.  In the heads and bases of pumps this supports the shaft bearings.  
Sometimes called a bearing support.  
WC Tungsten Carbide (sometimes confused with TC) . 
Wellbore 
Conditions  Conditions that impact the run life of an  ESP system.  The term is often used 
within a failure report or in describing operational issues of an ESP.  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 53 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Annex B  
(Informative)  
Failure Analysis Nomenclature  
 
1. Reason for Pull  
Electrical  Flow  Maintenance or 
Repair  Other  Recompletion  Suspend  
High current  
Low current  
Open circuit  
Phase 
Unbalance  
Short circuit  Low flow to 
surface 
No flow to surface Casing repair  
Clean -out 
Other downhole repair  
Sand control repair  
Tubing repair  Economics  
Logging well Change lift method  
Change well type  
Change production zone  
Other  
Resize Lift system  
Stimulation  Permanent 
abandonment  
 Shut In  
 
Temporary 
abandonment  
 
2. Component Description (Component & Sub -component) – (1) 
Pump  Gas Handler  Intake /Gas 
separator  Seal/ Protector  Motor  
Base  
Intake  
Coupling  
Diffusers  
Head  
Housing  
Impellers  
Key 
O-rings  
Screen  
Shaft  
Shaft support bearing  
Snap rings  
Thrust washers  Base  
Intake  
Coupling  
Diffusers  
Head  
Housing  
Impellers  
Key 
O-rings  
Screen  
Shaft  
Shaft support bearing  
Snap rings  
Thrust washers  Base  
Coupling  
Diffusers  
Discharge ports  
Head  
Housing  
Impeller  
Inducer section  
Intake ports  
Key 
O-rings  
Screen  
Shaft  
Shaft support bearing  
Snap rings  
Thrust washers  Bag chamber  
Base  
Coupling  
Drain valve  
Fill valve  
Head  
Housing  
Labyrinth chamber  
Mechanical seals  
O-rings  
Radial bearings  
Relief valve  
Shaft  
Shaft support bearing  
Snap rings  
Thrust bearing  Base  
Coupling  
Drain port  
Fill valve  
Filter  
Head  
Housing  
Motor -end connectors  
O-rings  
Oil 
Pothead connector  
Rotor bearing  
Rotors  
Shaft  
Shaft support bearing  
Snap rings  
Stator  
Thrust bearing  
Varnish  
 
Component Description (Component & Sub -component) – (2) 
Cable  Non-ESP component  Other ESP component  Non-equipment failure  
Main power cable  
Motor lead extension  
Packer penetrator  
Pigtail  
Pothead connector  
Splices  
Wellhead penetrator  Diverter valve  
Casing 
Check valve  
Desander  
Drain valve  
Filter  
Packer  
Sand screen  
Tubing  
Y-tool Downhole sensor  
Shroud Non-equipment failure  

=== PAGE 54 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
3. Mode of Failure  
Electrical  External  Material  Mechanical  Other  
High impedance 
/Resistance  
Low impedance /Resistance  
Open circuit  
Phase Unbalance  
Short circuit Coated -External  
Coated- Internal  
Contaminated /Foreign material  
Plugged  
Stuck Closed  
Stuck Open Brittle  
Burn  
Corroded  
Discolored  
Eroded /pressure 
washed  
Hardened  
Melted  
Overheated  
Swollen  
Worn Bent 
Broken / Fractured  
Buckled  
Burst / Ruptured  
Collapsed  
Cracked 
Damaged  
Dented  
Disconnected  
Failed pressure test  
Failed vibration test  
Faulty clearance or alignment  
Leaking  
Loose / Spinning  
Low efficiency  
Punctured  
Scratched  
Squashed / Flattened  
Stuck  
Torn 
Twisted  
Vibration / Rub marks  
Vibration / Unbalanced  Non-equipment 
Failure  
Pending teardown  
Pending failure analysis 
 
 
4. Root Cause Classification – (1) 
Completion  Force Majeure  Installation  Manufacturing  
Casing failure  
Failure of perforations /Liner  
Failure or improper sand 
control system  
Frac sand flowback  
Non-ESP downhole failure  Natural disaster  
Sabotage / Vandalism  
Weather / Oceanographic  Field service  
Reran damaged equipment  
Service rig  
System assembly  
Well cleanout  Equipment testing  
Fabrication problem  
Materials selection  
Assembly  
Mechanical design  
Quality control  
 
 
Root Cause Classification – (2) 
Pending Teardown or 
Failure Analysis  Other  Operation  Power System  
Awaiting failure analysis  
Awaiting pull  
No teardown or Failure 
analysis  Non-equipment 
failure Controller settings  
Enhanced recovery method or production 
strategy  
Inadequate monitoring  
Operating procedure  
Operation of other wells in the field  
Well treatment  Poor power quality  
Power disruption / Lightning  
Surface equipment failure  

=== PAGE 55 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
 
 
Root Cause Classification – (3) 
Reservoir 
or Fluids  Storage and 
Transportation  System design and Selection  Technology Limitation  Well 
Construction  
Asphaltene  
Bottomhole 
Temperature  
Corrosive fluid  
Free gas  
High inflow  
Iron sulfide  
Low or No 
inflow  
Paraffin  
Reservoir 
failure  
Sand  
Scale  
Water Cut  Packaging or 
restraints  
Storage  
Transportation  Equipment selection  
Equipment selection – Volumetric 
capacity  
Equipment selection –  Materials  
Equipment selection –  Pressure 
capacity  
Improper data used in design / 
selection 
System configuration  Exceeded gas capability  
Exceeded temperature 
capability  
Fatigue  Deviated Well  
Dogleg sever ity 
Liner hanger  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 56 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
  
Annex C  
(Informative)  
ESP Pulling Checklist  
 
   Safety/planning meeting held at beginning of job describing all work to be done and safety 
procedures to be followed.  
  Ensure ESP electrical system has been locked -out and zero energy proven. If not already 
completed, isolate down- hole electrical system by disconnecting down- hole cable from 
surface electrical system.   
  Prepare for proper record keeping during pulling operations.  This includes noting all 
equipment descriptions, serial numbers, equipment installation order and observations made 
during the pull.   
   Using an ohmmeter, confirm and record down- hole electri cal readings  
   Using a megger, confirm and record down -hole electrical resistance of each phase -to-ground.  
This activity is to be completed using proper safety considerations ( i.e., Hot Work Permit).    
   Verify that all the proper equipment for pulling equipment ( i.e., lifting clamps) is ready and 
available.  
   Ensure tubing slips fastened so they cannot turn and the backups on the tubing tongs 
working properly.  
   Confirm placement of the power cable spooler and that cable sheave is secure and aligned 
so cable will have a minimum angle against the tubing and the minimum weight of cable.   
   Lift the tubing and cable from the well to dislodge the tubing slips or ha nger from the well 
head.  
  Using an ohmmeter, re -confirm and record down -hole electrical readings from below the 
tubing hanger.  
  Using a megger, re -confirm and record down -hole electrical resistance of each phase -to-
ground from below the tubing hanger.  This activity is to be completed using proper safety 
considerations ( i.e., Hot Work Permit).    
   As pulling out of well, remove any clamps or bands carefully to allow the cable to become 
free of the tubing.  
   Proceed with the pulling activities and carefully remove the cable and tubing from the well.  
   Observe the condition of the cable being pulled. Look for corrosion, pitting, dings, swelling, 
scale, mechanical damage, condition of splices and damage from bands or clamps and note any abnormality on the pulling report.   
   During pulling operation note number of cable bands and/or clamps retrieved.  Note any 
bands or clamps that are loose or missing through observation and by comparing to 
installation report.    Record observations on pull report.  

=== PAGE 57 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
    During pulling operation note presence, approximate thickness ( i.e., light, moderate, heavy) 
and measured depths of scale / scale- like material on production tubing/cable and on the 
ESP assembly.   Record observations on pull report.  
   During pulling operation note if the system is hard to pull from the well ( i.e., dragging, hanging 
up, heavy resistance).  Record observations on pull report.  
   It is not recommended to re -use motor lead cables (MLC).  It is advisable to cut the MLC 
approximately one foot (0.3 m) above the motor terminal connection and leave the cable 
pothead attached to the motor to  preserve any evidence in the terminal area.  
   Note any and, if possible, photograph any damage or debris observed on tubing, cable,  or 
other ESP equipment on the well -pulling report.  Capture and preserve debris samples, if 
possible.   
   After each piece of ESP equipment is separated from the ESP assembly, check the shaft 
rotation of the assembly,  and note if rotation is free, hard, etc.  on pull report.  
   Check the condition of any assembly bolts, O-rings , coupling and shaft.  Examine all 
equipment for solids, metal, mechanical damage, excessive heat,  and vibration.  Record 
information on the pull report.  
   Check the inside surface of the equipment for de bris or wear. If the shaft can be reached, 
rotate shafts, and check for side play and smooth rotation. Record results on the pull report.  
   After the proper checks have been completed, place a shipping cap on each component 
head and base (where possible).  Following necessary safety precautions, carefully lay the component to the side of the well.  
   Continue this process for any additional component with each component treated as a 
separate unit.  
   Check the contents of each section of the seal assembly for contamination. This is done by 
removing the plug from the drain ports. Drain some, if not all, of the contents from the seal section and catch samples of the contents. Inspect for water, debris, discoloration and 
contaminates. Record the findings on the pull report.  
   Check the shaft rotation of the seal and motor coupled together using the proper coupling 
wrench prior to removing the seal section(s) from the motor section.  Record observation on 
the pull report.  
   At the ESP motor, pe rform the following electrical tests at the top of each motor section. Use 
an ohmmeter and measure the motor phase- to-phase resistance (A to B, A to C and B to C) 
and the motor phase- to-ground resistance (A to ground, B to ground, and C to ground).  
Record on the pull report.  
   Test the isolated power cable segment, using a megger measure the cable resistance in 
megohms: from phase- to-phase (A to B, A to C, and B to C) and from each phase -to-ground 
(A to ground, B to ground and C to ground). Record the readings in the pull report.  
   If the MLC pothead has been disconnected from the ESP motor (rather than cut -off), place 
shipping cap on the motor lead.  
  Ensure any unexpected, atypical,  or unusual pull observations are reported to appropriate 
well owner representative prior to proceeding with further well recompletion activities.  

=== PAGE 58 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Annex D  
(Informative)  
Dismantle Inspection and Failure Analysis Checklist  
  Installation ticket/report(s)  
  Pull ticket/report(s)  
  Field service, troubleshooting ticket/report(s)  
  Production Data to include any applicable well treatments, chemical reports, chemical 
treatment history, etc.  
  SCADA /DCS  data 
  ESP Controller/VSD/VFD data (download)  
  Operational information (monitoring system, any additional notes)  
  Sizing and application data  
  Wellbore diagram  
  Deviation survey (should include dogleg information)  
  Factory acceptance testing (FAT) results  
  Post operation test results (if available).  Often referred to as PIT test  
  Cable test results  
  Weather data (if applicable/available)  

=== PAGE 59 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
   Previous failure reports (if applicable)  
  Manufacturing quality reports (as applicable)  
  VSD set up sheet  
  Electrical feed- through (penetrator) data (if applicable)  
 
 
 
 
      
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
    

=== PAGE 60 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 Annex E  
(Informative)  
Dismantle Inspection and Failure Analysis Tooling 
Checklist  
  1000v Megger  
  2500v or 5000v Megger (optional)  
  Torque wrenches  
  Gauging for measuring shaft play  
  High intensity flashlights  
  Borescope (preferred)  
  Magnifying glass  
  Magnet  
  Sample bottles  
  Sample bags  
  Permanent markers  
  Paint sticks 
  Horizontal pump test system (HPTS)  
  Motor Idle Slant Test (MIST)  

=== PAGE 61 ===
This document is not an API Standard; it is under consideration within an API technical committee but has not 
received all approvals required to become an API Standard. It shall not be reproduced or circulated or 
quoted, in whole or in part, outside of API committee activities except with the approval of the Chairman of 
the committee having jurisdiction and staff of the API Standards Dept. Copyright API. All rights reserved.  
 
 
   Tooling to pressure test mechanical seals  
  Tooling to pressure test relief valves (seal/protector)  
  Go/No- go gauges as required  
  Tools to disassemble ESP components to include sub- components  
  Cable test capabilities  
  MLE pothead disassembly tooling  
  Cable splice disassembly tooling  
  Facility set up to review trends, take notes, set up computer, etc.  
 
  
 
 
