=== PAGE 1 ===
More than 90% of all producing oil wells require some form of artificial lift 
to increase the flow of fluids from wells when a reservoir no longer has suf -
ficient energy to naturally produce at economic rates or to boost early pro -
duction to improve financial performance. One of the most versatile and 
adaptable artificial lift methods is electric submersible pumping. 
Deployed in an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 wells worldwide, electric 
submersible pumps (ESPs) consist of multiple centrifugal pump stages 
mounted in series within a housing mated to a submersible electric motor. 
These pumps are connected to surface controls and electric power by 
armor-protected cables. Surface electric drives power and control ESP sys -
tems, which are able to lift from 16 to 4,770 m3/d [100 to 30,000 bbl/d], a 
pump rate operation range that surpasses the performance of other pump-
type artificial lift systems such as rod pumps, progressing cavity pumps and 
hydraulic lift. 
ESP Origins
In 1911, 18-year-old Russian engineer Armais Arutunoff invented the first 
electric motor that operated in water. He added a drill and a centrifugal 
pump to the motor, inventing what is now known as the electric submersible 
pump. Arutunoff immigrated to the US, where he founded Russian Electrical 
Dynamo of Arutunoff, or REDA. Electric submersible pumps are now operat -
ing in onshore and offshore fields throughout the world.
Anatomy of an ESP System 
Electric submersible pump systems comprise both downhole and surface 
components (Figure 1) . The overall length and diameter of ESP downhole 
equipment are designed based on the horsepower necessary to deliver the 
desired flow rate.
An ESP is a multistage centrifugal pump whose stages are stacked; the 
operating requirements of the well and completion design dictate the num -
ber of stages. Each stage contains a rotating impeller and stationary diffus -
ers typically cast from high-nickel iron to minimize abrasion or corrosion 
damage. As well fluid flows into the first stage of the ESP, it passes through 
an impeller, and the fluid is centrifuged radially outward, gaining energy in 
the form of velocity. The centrifugal pump is driven by an induction motor 
that can attain operating speeds of more than 5,000 rpm when using a vari -
able speed drive.
After it exits the impeller, the fluid is forced to make a sharp turn to 
enter the diffuser. As it travels through this section, the fluid is diffused, and 
its velocity is converted to pressure. The fluid, which now has a slightly 
higher pressure than when it entered the first stage, enters the next impel -
ler and diffuser stage to repeat the process. The fluid passes through all 
stages of the pump, incrementally gaining pressure in each stage until it 
achieves a total developed head, or designated discharge pressure, and has 
sufficient energy to travel to the surface of the well. 
A pump’s operational performance is illustrated in its pump perfor -
mance curve (Figure 2) . A performance curve is generated for each pump manufactured and quantifies the relationship between pump horsepower, 
efficiency, flow rate and head relative to the operating flow rate. The pump 
recommended operating range is defined for each pump stage in the catalog 
THE DEFINING SERIES
Electrical Submersible Pumps
Oilfield Review   2015. 
Copyright © 2015 Schlumberger.
For help in preparation of this article, thanks to George Waters, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
USA, and Diego Narvaez, Houston.Rick von Flatern
Senior Editor
Figure 1. Typical ESP configuration. Downhole ESP components include 
motor, protectors, pump sections, pump intakes, power cables, gas-
handling equipment and downhole sensors (not shown). Surface 
components include pump-control equipment such as variable-speed 
drives and an electric power supply.Produced
fluidsElectric
power supplyElectric drives and
pump-control equipment
Power cable
Separated gas
Motor protectorsGas separator
Pump intake
Motor
Perforations
Figure 2. Pump performance curve. Such curves are generated to chart a 
pump’s ability to displace fluids and to determine the number of pump 
stages required to achieve a desired production rate. The head capacity 
curve (blue) shows the amount of lift at a given flow rate. The horsepower 
requirements of the pump (red) across a range of flow capacities are 
derived from performance testing. The pump efficiency (green) is calculated 
from the head, flow capacity, fluid specific gravity and horsepower. The 
purple shaded area indicates the most efficient operating range for this 
specific pump. The operating point (red dot) shows that, at 60 Hz, this 
185-stage pump is operating within the optimum range.Head, ft
Flow rate, bbl/d
Horsepower
Pump efficiency , %5,400
4,800
4,200
3,600
3,000
2,400
1,800
1,200
600
0
0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,80090
80
70
60
50
40
30
0816243240485664
Head
HorsepowerPump efficiencyOperating point

=== PAGE 2 ===
Oilfield Review
www.slb.com/defining
performance curve. By tracking these parameters over the course of the 
well’s life, the operator can determine at what point the ESP falls out of its 
recommended range and plan for resizing the ESP or replacing it with a dif -
ferent lift system to accommodate the actual flow rate. 
A downhole submersible motor provides power to the pump. The motor 
is typically a two-pole, three-phase, squirrel-cage induction electric motor 
available in a variety of operating voltages, currents and horsepower ratings 
ranging from 7.5 kW to more than 750 kW. Motor size is dictated by the 
amount of power required to drive the pump to lift the estimated volume of 
produced fluid out of the well. Wellbore fluids passing over the motor hous -
ing act as cooling agents. 
A seal section between the pump intake and the motor houses the thrust 
bearing that carries the axial thrust developed by the pump. The seal also 
isolates and protects the motor from well fluids and equalizes the pressure 
in the wellbore with the pressure inside the motor. 
In wells characterized by relatively high gas-to-oil ratios (GORs) and low 
bottomhole pressures, produced fluids may contain quantities of free gas. 
Submersible pumps are susceptible to operational problems, including cavi -
tation or gas locking in high-volume free gas environments, which may 
shorten pump run life. In these applications, a gas separator is installed at 
the intake section of the pump to separate the gas from the well fluid before 
it enters the pump. If the amount of free gas exceeds a designated limit, a 
gas handling device may also be installed downstream of the separator. 
To ensure optimal ESP performance, operators may install downhole 
sensors that continuously acquire real-time system measurements such as 
pump intake and discharge pressures and temperatures, vibration and cur -
rent leakage rate. Typically, users monitor pumps through supervisory con -
trol and data acquisition (SCADA) systems, which act as central repositories 
of data from all downhole sensors and can initiate actions through linked 
controls or alerts. When it detects a pump reading that is outside preset 
levels, a sensor alerts the operator in real time and can be enabled to make 
settings changes to the pump via remote control. 
Power is provided from the surface to the motor via a specially con -
structed three-phase electric cable designed for downhole environments. To 
limit cable movement in the well and to support its weight, the cable is 
banded or clamped to the production tubing. 
Electric submersible pump surface components include an electric sup -
ply system. Onshore, electricity is typically provided by a commercial power 
distribution system. A transformer may be required to convert the electric -
ity provided via commercial power lines to match the voltage and amperage 
requirements of the ESP motor. Offshore, ESP operations require a portable 
power source such as a diesel generator. 
Intelligent, remote terminal, unit-programmable controllers and drives 
at the surface maintain the proper flow of electricity to the pump motor. 
Major controller types include fixed-frequency switchboards, soft-start con -
trollers and variable speed controllers; application, economics and the pre -
ferred level of control dictate the choice of controller.   
A variable speed drive (VSD) reads the downhole data recorded by the 
SCADA system and scales back or ramps up the motor speed to optimize a 
balance of pump efficiency and production rate. The drive allows the pump 
to be operated continuously or intermittently or be shut off in the event of a 
significant operational problem. The direct speed control afforded by the 
VSD increases system efficiency and the run life of the ESP system while 
reducing the incidence of downtime. Advantages and Disadvantages
In many field applications, ESP systems provide several operational advantages 
over other forms of artificial lift. An ESP is especially appropriate for moderate-
to-high production rate wells, including highly deviated wells and remote, sub -
sea deepwater wells. The pumps can be manufactured from high-grade, 
corrosion-resistant metallurgies for application in well environments with high-
GOR fluids, high temperatures and fluids containing corrosive acid gases. 
Electric submersible pumps provide increased production while han -
dling high water cuts brought on by pressure maintenance and secondary 
recovery operations. The systems are quiet and safe and require a smaller 
surface footprint than that of some other lift systems, making them a pre -
ferred option in offshore and environmentally sensitive areas. ESP systems 
can be configured with flexibility to accommodate the dynamic evolution of 
fluid properties and flow rates during the life of the well and can operate 
with pump intake pressure of less than 1 MPa [100 psi].  
However, a number of operational challenges must be considered when 
running ESPs. Even though ESP systems can be built with special abrasion-
resistant metallurgies and upgraded radial bearing materials and configura -
tion, ESP run times can be severely compromised in high sand and solids 
content environments. Performance also degrades when pumping viscous 
fluids or high gas-to-liquid ratio mixtures. The development of more effi -
cient downhole gas separation and gas handling devices has improved ESP 
applications in flow streams containing high volumes of free gas, but those 
devices add to completion costs.  
Although ESP systems can operate at 0° to 90° inclinations, their appli -
cation is restricted by the well curvature through which they must pass dur -
ing deployment and landing. ESP manufacturers must use dogleg severity to 
determine the stress and deflection of the ESP components to ensure 
proper installation and operation is possible. 
Although ESP motors are built on voltages that typically range from  
460 to 4,200 V at 60Hz for oilfield applications, most ESPs use higher voltage 
motors. As a result, a higher voltage power supply is needed at the surface 
to compensate for the voltage drop in the power cable, which can be signifi -
cant in deep installations requiring long power cables.  
Pump efficiency peaks when a pump is operating at the flow rate corre -
sponding to the best efficiency point (BEP) on the pump performance curve; 
efficiency decreases at flow rates above or below the BEP. As the production 
rate continues to drop, the ESP may need to be pulled and replaced with a 
lift system better suited to lower production rates; for onshore applications, 
a suitable replacement might be a rod pump or PCP. Below a rate of approxi -
mately 25 m3/d [150 bbl/d], ESPs are usually not an economic lift option. 
Future Developments
The industry is developing robust pump designs that will extend the appli -
cability of ESP systems in environments with high-solids flow streams. 
Other research initiatives are focused on improved reliability designs at the 
component level and integrated systems and on advanced operating surveil -
lance and control algorithms to significantly increase ESP system run life. 
To improve the economics of ESPs in remote offshore wells, the industry 
is investigating more cost-effective means of deploying and pulling equip -
ment. A rigless intervention using low-cost standard slickline, coil tubing or 
downhole tractor conveyance would avoid the high expense and long wait 
times for a dedicated rig. Using this option, an operator can deploy or 
retrieve the ESP assembly in a matter of hours and minimize production 
losses. Ultimately, developments such as this will enable a greater number 
of operators to maximize well production.
